                                         Digital Twins are Funhouse Mirrors: Five Systematic
                                                                             Distortions

                                         Tianyi Peng,1 George Gui,1 Melanie Brucks,1 Daniel J. Merlau,1 Grace Jiarui Fan,1
arXiv:2509.19088v5 [cs.CY] 19 Apr 2026




                                         Malek Ben Sliman,1 Eric J. Johnson,1 Abdullah Althenayyan,1 Silvia Bellezza,1
                                             Dante Donati,1 Hortense Fong,1 Elizabeth Friedman,1 Ariana Guevara,1
                                         Mohamed Hussein,1 Kinshuk Jerath,1 Bruce Kogut,1 Akshit Kumar,2 Kristen Lane,1
                                         Hannah Li,1 Vicki Morwitz,1 Oded Netzer,1 Patryk Perkowski,3 Olivier Toubia1∗
                                         1 Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA       2 Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA


                                                                 3 Yeshiva University, New York, NY 10033, USA


                                                               ∗ Corresponding author. Email: ot2107@columbia.edu




                                                 Scientists and practitioners are aggressively moving to deploy digital twins—
                                             LLM-based models of real individuals—across social science and policy research.
                                             We conducted 19 pre-registered studies with 164 diverse outcomes (e.g., attitudes
                                             towards hiring algorithms, intention to share misinformation) and compared hu-
                                             man responses to those of their digital twins (trained on each person’s previous
                                             answers to over 500 questions). We establish an empirical benchmark for dig-
                                             ital twin performance: digital twins’ answers are only modestly more accurate
                                             than those from the (homogeneous) base LLM and correlate weakly with human
                                             responses (average r = 0.20). To guide future twin development, we further doc-
                                             ument five ways in which digital twins distort human behavior: (i) insufficient
                                             individuation, (ii) stereotyping, (iii) representation bias, (iv) ideological biases,
                                             (v) hyper-rationality. Finally, we make our full dataset and code public as a stan-


                                                                                          1
      dardized testbed for novel digital twin methodologies. Together, our results caution
      against premature deployment while laying the groundwork for the transparent,
      replicable, and iterative science necessary for responsible deployment of twins.

   One-sentence summary: Despite bold industry promises for digital twins, a large-scale
mega-study finds they perform only marginally better than generic AI personas and docu-
ments five key distortions that serve as a diagnostic roadmap for improvement.
Large language models (LLMs) hold the capacity to fundamentally transform psychological mea-
surement by overcoming the long-standing cognitive, ethical, and practical barriers inherent to
human subjects research (1, 2, 3, 4). Through the scalable simulation of human responses, LLMs
offer not only faster and cheaper data collection, but also potentially “better” data for researchers
and managers: LLMs do not tire, can be repeatedly surveyed, and can simulate high-stakes or poten-
tially harmful scenarios without ethical risk. Although LLMs can show human-like behavior (5, 6)
and directionally replicate experimental treatment effects (4, 7), many researchers have expressed
skepticism, both on theoretical and empirical grounds (8, 9, 10, 11, 12). Studies have shown that
LLMs often struggle to reproduce human opinions (13, 14, 15), tend to lack heterogeneity (16), and
overestimate experimental effect sizes (7).
   To address these concerns, experts and practitioners alike have proposed using digital twins:
base LLM models (e.g., GPT, Llama) augmented with rich personal information to simulate specific
individual behavior (17). At first glance, digital twins present a remarkably elegant solution, offering
what appears to be a panacea to the foundational limitations documented in prior synthetic data
research. First, distinct, tailored models offer the potential to infuse human variance into responses,
overcoming the homogenization that often plagues general models (16). Second, anchoring the
model in rich and real human data may provide the detail necessary to prevent hallucinations
or confabulations and address default sycophancy and normativity that undermines base model
accuracy (7, 10, 11, 13). Together, this would allow for “simulations that better reflect the myriad,
often idiosyncratic, factors that influence individuals’ attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors” (17). The
allure of digital twins is further amplified by the unique applications they unlock, from agentic AI
(e.g., negotiating, working, or dating on one’s behalf) to self-reflection, where individuals interact
with digital copies of themselves.
   Given these promises, digital twin applications are being frantically built, deployed and sold

                                                   2
across academia and industry. For example, the startup simile.ai, based on (17), recently raised
$100 M,1 joining a growing list of synthetic data startups with valuations in the order of $1B.2
    Despite fervent interest, the empirical foundation of digital twins remains remarkably thin. To
date, only two initial studies have directly examined whether twins can serve as human surrogates.
One study created digital twins of over 1,000 individuals based on transcripts from two-hour
interviews (17) and reported encouraging results (relative accuracy of 85% on the General Social
Survey, based on the ratio of digital twin accuracy to test-retest accuracy). However, the data are not
publicly available, presenting a significant hurdle to the scientific understanding of digital twins.
And without knowing the degree of separation between the original transcripts and validation
questions, it is hard to fully evaluate performance.
    The second study developed Twin-2K-500, a public dataset permitting the creation of digital
twins of over 2,000 individuals based on their answers to over 500 questions (18) and reported
relatively high accuracy of digital twins on holdout data (average accuracy of 72%, relative ac-
curacy of 88% based on the ratio of digital twin accuracy to test-retest accuracy). As a first test,
however, it was necessarily limited in scope: twins were not compared against benchmarks such
as demographic-only personas. Furthermore, twins only replicated about half the experimental
effects in humans. And in both studies (17, 18), validation was based on a relatively narrow set of
well-known experiments and surveys, which may overlap with the training data of the base model,
raising concerns of leakage (19). Consequently, the field is rapidly adopting a technology that lacks
essential empirical validation, leaving open the risk of making consequential decisions based on
an illusion of personalization rather than genuine individual-level insight.
    To address this urgent empirical gap, we conducted a large-scale, pre-registered mega-study de-
signed in the spirit of true scientific inquiry. We assembled 23 co-authors from various backgrounds
within social science, each curious to test the validity of digital twins in their domain of interest.
Together, we jointly designed and ran the most comprehensive empirical test of digital twins to
date, with 19 new pre-registered (https://researchbox.org/4145) sub-studies covering 164 diverse
outcomes (cumulative sample size of N=13,506 human participants across substudies, 1,784 unique
   1 https://techfundingnews.com/100m-for-stanford-spinout-simile-ai-that-simulates-human-decisions/,

https://www.wsj.com/cio-journal/can-ai-replace-humans-for-market-research-4f818890?st=MF12bP.
    2 e.g., https://techcrunch.com/2025/12/05/ai-synthetic-research-startup-aaru-raised-a-series-a-at-a-1b-headline-
valuation/?utm campaign=daily weekend.


                                                         3
participants). We matched each human answer to their digital twin’s answer to the same question.
To give digital twins their best shot, we conducted our study on the validated Twin-2K-500 human
sample and their corresponding digital twins. We invited the original Twin-2K-500 participants to
complete entirely new studies (including novel stimuli) and then compared their answers against
their twins’. This mega-study, unprecedented in scale and scope, presents an earnest, transparent,
and replicable empirical benchmark of digital twin performance.
    Our evaluation demonstrated underwhelming performance overall. While digital twins showed
revealing variance across domains and individuals, they largely failed to faithfully mimic human
responses. We also gathered human expert predictions on twin performance to gauge relative
understanding of this nascent technology. We find that these experts generally failed to predict the
behavior of digital twins (see SI), underscoring the value of empirical tests.
    In light of these disappointing results, we conducted exploratory analyses to identify how
digital twins distort human behavior and therefore how they may be improved. We document five
distortions: (i) insufficient individuation, (ii) stereotyping, (iii) representation bias, (iv) ideological
biases, (v) hyper-rationality. These distortions are generally consistent with previous literature
on synthetic data, suggesting that state-of-the-art digital twins are not yet able to fully resolve
known limitations of synthetic data. Without actively addressing these distortions, the premature
deployment of twins risks systematically misrepresenting human cognition in ways that could
undermine both scientific understanding and practical applications.
    Together, this work advances the scientific foundation of digital twins on three fronts. First, we
establish an empirical baseline for where the technology stands today, grounding a field thus far
driven more by promise than evidence. Second, by consolidating disparate prior findings into a
unified evaluative framework, we offer a roadmap for the improvement of digital twins and a clear
set of indicators on which to evaluate them. This enables more targeted improvements in future
digital twin research and direct comparisons across methodologies. Third, by releasing our full
dataset and code, we provide a standardized testbed for the improvement of digital twin pipelines.
By quantifying current performance, establishing clear, standardized metrics and benchmarks for
safety and accuracy, and engaging in open science practices, we enable transparent, replicable, and
iterative science necessary to move this technology forward to the point where it can be deployed
responsibly in both academia and industry.


                                                    4
Empirical Context
Our studies cover a wide range of domains and topics including creativity, politics, privacy pref-
erences, storytelling, fairness perceptions, interactions with technology platforms, luxury con-
sumption, news consumption, and labor market preferences, among others. Unlike prior work that
primarily examined digital twins’ performance in published studies (17, 18), our sub-studies com-
bined established paradigms from published research, new paradigms from unpublished research,
and newly designed studies. Our contexts range from behavioral economics paradigms to person-
ality scale development and include correlational, within-subject, and between-subject designs.
Together, they span a considerably broader and richer scope of use cases than any paper to date,
providing an ecologically valid test of digital twins as they are available today.
    To create each digital twin, we used in-context learning based on answers to over 500 ques-
tions (approximately 128K characters) provided by the twin’s human counterpart. These questions
covered demographics (14 questions), personality traits (279 questions from 19 personality tests
measuring 26 constructs), cognitive abilities (85 questions covering 11 measures), economic pref-
erences (34 questions covering 10 measures), as well as heuristics and biases experiments (48
questions from 16 experiments), and a pricing study (40 questions), collected during a four-wave,
longitudinal study (average completion time of 145 min). These (human) data have high test-
retest accuracy, good face validity, and largely replicate known effects, suggesting they provide
high-quality training data for digital twins (18). While no single study can evaluate all possible
instantiations of digital twins, our implementation represents the most replicable and scientifically
rigorous approach currently available. Unlike twins built on proprietary data, our twins are built
using the most comprehensive (and widely used, with approximately 15,000 downloads) dataset
publicly available. We complement this public resource by contributing an even more comprehen-
sive dataset (including responses to novel stimuli and paradigms), which can be merged with the
Twin-2K-500 dataset by matching participants across the two datasets.3
    In each sub-study, both human participants and their corresponding digital twins answered the
exact same questions. By matching each digital twin’s answers to those given by its human counter-
   3 Researchers may combine our data with the original Twin-2K-500 dataset, with twins matched using a Twin ID.

For privacy reasons we are unable to share the Prolific ID associated with each Twin ID; therefore, other researchers
are not able to run new studies on the human sample as we did.


                                                         5
part to the same questions, we are able to test, across a wide range of domains, the individual-level
accuracy of digital twins as well as the correlation between responses from the digital twins and
their human counterparts. Further, because our digital twins are based on a representative sample of
the U.S. population, we can explore not only how performance varies across types of domains and
questions, but also which groups are well represented by digital twins and which are not. We share
the detailed analyses of each sub-study for researchers interested in using digital twins in specific do-
mains (see SI). We make our data (https://huggingface.co/datasets/LLM-Digital-Twin/
Twin-2K-500-Mega-Study) and code (https://github.com/TianyiPeng/Twin-2K-500-Mega-Study)
publicly available.4 See Fig. 1 for an overview and SI for details of our mega-study. We pre-registered
all our studies and associated outcomes, as well as our basic performance evaluation. In our pre-
registration we also indicated that, beyond these metrics, this mega-study is exploratory in nature.
We did not pre-register any specific hypotheses as to how well digital twins would perform, and we
allowed ourselves to explore systematic ways in which digital twins differed from humans.



Results

Digital Twin Performance

Performance metrics

We pre-registered 164 outcomes (e.g., willingness to share a particular article on social media,
likelihood of applying for a particular job) across our 19 sub-studies. We focus on performance
measures that directly match the response of each digital twin to that of its human counterpart.
Specifically, for each outcome, we match each twin’s response to that of its corresponding human,
and compute two metrics:

    • Individual-level accuracy: Following previous research (18, 20), we measure individual-
       level accuracy as 1-(MAD/range), where MAD is the mean absolute deviation between a
   4 Researchers may combine our data with the original Twin-2K-500 dataset, with twins matched using a Twin ID.

For privacy reasons we are unable to share the Prolific ID associated with each Twin ID; therefore, other researchers
are not able to run new studies on the human sample as we did.




                                                         6
               2K Humans                                                                                 Human Answers


                                            Luxury Consumption      Labor Market Preferences
      Digital Twin Construction
                                            Storytelling   Creativity   Politics   Privacy Preferences
                                                                                                                 How do twins'
                       Demographics                                                                          answers compare to
                     Personality Test          19 New Pre-Registered Studies                                   matched answers
                Economic Preferences                                                                           from their human
          Well-known Behavior Tests                                                                           counterparts when
                                            Fairness Perceptions Interactions with Tech Platforms
           … >500 Questions in Total
                                                                                                            deployed in practice?
                                            News Consumption        Context effects      ….




      Corresponding Twins                                                                                LLM-Simulated
         [Twin-2K-500]                                                                                   Twin Answers




Figure 1: Mega-Study Overview. We ran 19 pre-registered studies on digital twins from the Twin-
2K-500 dataset and their human counterparts. The studies were proposed by a diverse group of
scholars and cover a wide range of behaviors and domains. As a set, they represent how digital
twins may be leveraged today by social scientists. We match the answer of each digital twin to each
question with the answer from their human counterpart, allowing us to explore the performance of
digital twins at both the individual and population levels.

       human’s response and that of their twin, and range is the natural range of the outcome.5 We
       compute the average individual-level accuracy across participants for each outcome, where
       higher values indicate greater accuracy (between 0 and 1, where 1 denotes perfect accuracy).
       For example, on a 1 to 7 scale, if the human answered 5 and the twin answered 6, accuracy
       would be 0.833.

     • Correlation: We calculate the correlation between human and twin responses across partic-
       ipants, for each outcome. This metric reflects the degree to which twins capture individual-
       level heterogeneity in human responses. Following previous research (17), we compute an
       overall average correlation across outcomes by first applying a Fisher z-transformation to
       individual correlations, averaging these values, and then converting back using an inverse
   5 We exclude outcomes without a defined range, such as open-ended price estimates, resulting in 161 outcomes for

this metric.


                                                                7
       transformation.

    In addition to the metrics above, which are based on matched human-twin data, we also
compute two distribution-level performance metrics that compare the aggregate distributions of
responses from twins and humans for each outcome. These metrics are more commonly available
(no individual-level matching required), but arguably less informative:

    • Comparison of averages: We compare the average response of humans to that of their twins
       for each outcome using the absolute value of Glass’s Δ.6 Higher values of this metric indicate
       larger differences between group means (expressed in standard deviations).

    • Comparison of standard deviations: We compute the ratio of standard deviations between
       humans and twins for each outcome. Values below (above) 1 suggest lower (higher) variance
       in twins relative to humans.


Performance comparisons

By default (and unless otherwise specified), we build each twin using a “full persona” approach
which augments the LLM’s context window with that human’s complete data from the Twin-2K-500
dataset. Across all outcomes, the average individual-level accuracy of the “full persona” approach is
0.748. See Fig. 2, and the SI for histograms of this and other performance metrics across outcomes
for the “full persona” approach.
    To contextualize this level of accuracy and quantify gains from leveraging individual-level data
for out-of-distribution predictions, we compare this performance to several benchmarks. First, we
compare performance to that of random responses, where responses to each outcome are drawn
from a uniform random distribution with support equal to the outcome’s range (i.e., no LLM is
required for this benchmark). The random benchmark already achieves an individual accuracy
level of 0.629, underscoring that absolute levels of individual-level accuracy should be interpreted
                                                              ˆ
   6 Glass’s Δ is an effect size measure calculated as: Δ = ( 𝑋           ˆ ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 )/𝑠 ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 , where 𝑋ˆ 𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑛 and 𝑋ˆ ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 are the
                                                                  𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑛 − 𝑋

sample means of the twin and human groups respectively, and 𝑠 ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛 is the standard deviation of the human group. It
is similar to Cohen’s d, but it relies on the standard deviation from the human sample only, as the assumption of equal
variances between the two samples is not valid in our setting.




                                                            8
Figure 2: Gains from Leveraging Individual-Level Data. *: best performing benchmark, or not
significantly different from best at p<0.05 (not applicable to ratio of standard deviations), after
applying Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons in each column. Creating digital twins
using rich individual-level data leads to a modest improvement in accuracy over predictions made
without any individual-level data (empty persona) and no significant improvement over personas
based on demographics only. Full personas improve the correlation between twin and human
responses compared to these benchmarks, although the correlation is modest and digital twins
remain under-dispersed.

relative to this baseline. As an illustration, if the true responses were uniformly distributed on [0,1],
always predicting 0 would yield an individual-level accuracy of 0.5.
   Next, we compare the “full persona” digital twin approach with a simple “empty persona”
benchmark, which uses an identical prompt for all respondents (i.e., no individual information)
and thus only reflects the base model’s behavior (with serving status and characteristics of the
base model such as temperature being the only source of variation). The empty persona benchmark
achieves an average accuracy of 0.734, which is only modestly lower than full personas (a difference




                                                   9
of 0.014, albeit statistically significant).7
    We lastly introduce a “demographics only” benchmark, which uses a persona description
that only includes the 14 demographic variables (region, sex, age, education, race, citizenship,
marital status, religion, religious attendance, political party, household income, political ideology,
household size, employment status) which are part of the Twin-2K-500 dataset (and therefore
also included in the full persona description). This benchmark captures the performance that
would be obtained from generic personas based on demographic characteristics only. We find that
individual-level accuracy of full-persona twins is not significantly better than personas based only
on demographic information (𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑝𝑒𝑟 𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎 = 0.748, 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎 𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑠 𝑜𝑛𝑙 𝑦 = 0.746,
𝑝 = 0.37). This provides initial evidence that, when predicting an individual’s response, digital
twins may mostly rely on stereotypical demographic-based tendencies rather than modeling an
individual’s distinct cognition. We explore this phenomenon and the comparison between full-
persona and demographics-only twins more thoroughly in a subsequent section.
    At the aggregate level (comparing the mean twin response to the mean human response for each
outcome), twin responses differ from human responses by 0.352 standard deviations on average;8
a paired t-test (using Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons) indicates a statistically
significant difference (𝑝 < 0.05/164) between humans and digital twins in 105 out of 164 outcomes
(64.0%).
    We next turn to our correlation metric, which captures how well twins reflect relative human-
level differences in individual responses across participants. The correlation between twin and
human responses is positive in 157 of the 164 outcomes (95.7%), and significantly positive (𝑝 <
0.05/165 — applying Bonferroni correction) in 97 of these cases (59.1%). The overall average
correlation is 0.197. On that metric, full personas perform markedly better than demographics-only
   7 We perform paired t-tests to compare each pair of benchmarks on each metric, with appropriate corrections for

multiple comparisons. We drop one outcome in these comparisons, the creativity rating of ideas generated by humans
and their twins in one of the sub-studies, as it was provided by humans and was only available for ideas from twins
based on the full persona approach.
   8 This means the MSE of the digital twin’s mean estimate is about (0.352𝜎) 2 ≈ 0.12𝜎 2 , which is approximately

equal to the MSE of the sample mean from 10 humans, 0.1𝜎 2 .




                                                        10
personas (r=0.145), empty personas (r=0.080) and random responses (r=0.001).9 Nevertheless, the
correlation achieved by digital twins is modest by most social science standards, and comparable
to the correlation found between height and intelligence (21). Note that (17) report a much higher
correlation in their digital twin study. However, they compute the correlation across questions for
each participant. In contrast, we compute the correlation across participants for each outcome. This
is more often the measure of interest, as social scientists often ask questions such as who is more
likely to vote for a candidate or who is more likely to purchase a specific product.
    In sum, enriching digital twins with detailed individual-level information significantly improves
individual-level prediction, that is, the ability to reproduce the exact responses given by specific
participants. However, the improvement over an empty persona is arguably negligible. Second, dig-
ital twins significantly improve our ability to capture heterogeneity across participants and predict
relative differences between them, that is, it enhances our ability to distinguish one participant from
another. However, the correlation between answers from digital twins and their human counter-
parts is modest. Together, these findings establish an empirical benchmark for where digital twin
technology stands today, revealing that although they show promise, digital twins fall well short of
their promise when placed in a rigorous and ecologically valid test.


Digital Twin Performance Across Implementation Methods

All results reported so far use GPT4.1 (dated 2025-04-14) with a default temperature of 0.7. One
might wonder whether poor digital twin performance was in part due the specific configurations
we employed rather than fundamental limitations of current digital twin technology. To explore the
role of these factors, we systematically varied the temperature and base LLM (GPT-5, Deepseek,
Gemini — including the latest Gemini-3 Pro model — and a version of GPT4.1 fine-tuned on
the Twin-2K-500 dataset). We find the best results overall using GPT4.1 with temperature = 0
   9 For correlation, we apply a z-transformation before conducting t-tests. We set correlation to 0 for cases where there

is no variation among twin answers, which may occur with the “empty persona” or “demographics only” benchmarks.
For the three outcomes that do not have a natural range, we use the empirical range in humans’ answers as support
for the random distribution. The correlation achieved by empty personas is not 0 due to variations in stimuli within
an outcome across participants, e.g., different respondents may see different versions of the same question or may
be exposed to various conditions. This creates meaningful variations across respondents, even if predictions are not
customized based on individual characteristics.


                                                           11
(e.g., highest correlation of 0.232 across all implementation options, tied for best on individual-
level accuracy at 0.752). We also experimented with replacing the full persona information with a
concise (approximately 13K characters), statement-based summary of the questions and responses
with distributional information (e.g., Big 5 personality scores with percentile ranks rather than 44
detailed questions and answers on which the scores are based). We find that this simpler version
performs very similarly to the full persona, offering a viable lower-cost alternative. See SI for
details.
    We also explored using an LLM fine-tuned specifically for human behavioral prediction as the
base model for the creation of digital twins (22, 20). These fine-tuned models, trained on large
cross-sectional datasets, may indeed serve as alternative base LLMs, i.e., they can be combined
with additional panel data in which participants are tracked across multiple experiments or studies,
allowing the creation of twins associated with specific individuals. We explored using Centaur (22)
as a base model. Performance was lower than that achieved using GPT as the base model. The
relatively low performance may be due to limitations of the Llama base model on which Centaur is
built, or to our formatting and out-of-distribution testing, among other reasons. We leave a thorough
investigation of the training of digital twins on such enhanced LLMs for future work. See SI for
details.
    Overall, twin performance across temperatures, base models, and persona formatting was, at
best, modest.


Digital Twin Performance Across Domains

The breadth of our study allows exploring the performance of digital twins across domains, using
a meta-analytic approach. We conduct regressions with each performance metric as the dependent
variable. Given that correlation is the performance metric most sensitive to the individual-level
information captured by digital twins, we focus on the regression with the (z-transformed) cor-
relation for each outcome as the main dependent variable.10 Our independent variables include a
set of categorical labels that characterize each outcome, related to the following domains: social,
preferences/attitudes, cognitive skills/rationality, content evaluation, human-tech interactions. We
also include mechanical features that might influence performance (e.g., sample size).
  10 We z-transform the correlation due to better statistical properties, e.g., being approximately normally distributed.




                                                          12
   We estimate a mixed linear model, including random intercepts for each sub-study (see SI for
details). We find that correlation was on average higher in the cognitive domain, on outcomes related
to human-technology interactions, and on outcomes that use response scales. Digital twins also
performed relatively better overall in the social domain. The correlation was higher when outcomes
related to conflict, pro-social issues, social cognition, or personality. However, the correlation
was significantly lower for outcomes where social desirability was salient, suggesting twins are less
capable of mimicking human responses in socially-sensitive contexts (descriptive evidence suggests
twins are more likely to provide socially-desirable responses). Correlations were also lower in the
political domain (consistent with previous findings such as (13) or (14)), on outcomes with valenced
(positive versus negative) evaluations, and when questions varied across participants (consistent
with prior findings that LLMs struggle to treat prompt-level variation as exogenous (23)).


Five Key Distortions

A natural objection to benchmarking digital twin performance today is that the technology will
undoubtedly improve as LLMs continue to evolve, making current performance largely beside
the point. However, meaningful improvement requires both an understanding of how digital twins
deviate from humans and a clear rubric of indicators against which progress can be measured.
To that end, we next characterize systematic distortions in digital twins’ representations of human
behavior that may underlie their poor performance. These distortions are consistent with previous
literature on synthetic data, suggesting that digital twins in their current form are not able to solve
known limitations of synthetic data. Of course, we cannot claim that our list is exhaustive, but
addressing these distortions is a necessary, if not sufficient, condition for improving the validity of
digital twins.


1. Insufficient Individuation

Adopting a Bayesian framework, one may think of the base LLM as reflecting a prior distribution
over how an individual may respond to a particular question. The additional information fed to
the LLM to build that person’s digital twin leads to an updated, posterior distribution of answers
tailored to that individual. Previous work on other forms of synthetic data found that LLM-generated


                                                  13
responses often suffer from excessive homogeneity (16). (13) argue that LLMs are steerable through
customized prompting, but that steerability does not guarantee alignment with human responses.
   By augmenting the base LLM with extensive individual-level data, digital twins offer the
potential to address this issue. To empirically assess whether this is the case, we first compare the
amount of variation in answers from twins vs. humans. The standard deviation of the twin responses
is lower than that of human responses in 154 of 164 cases (93.9%), indicating under-dispersion in
twin responses. This difference is statistically significant (𝑝 < 0.05/164 — applying Bonferroni
correction) in 140 of those 154 cases.
   The under-dispersion of digital twin answers relative to their human counterparts suggests
that while the additional data is able to steer the distribution in an appropriate direction (i.e., the
variations across digital twins better mirror the variations across people), the base model (i.e., the
prior) still carries significant weight and influence on the digital twins’ responses. In other words,
the answers are overly “shrunk” towards a base model. This suggests that providing extensive
individualized data does not necessarily address the homogeneity bias in LLMs.
   To further quantify this, we compare the MAD between answers from full-persona twins vs.
humans to the MAD between answers from full-persona twins vs. empty-persona twins (which only
reflect the base LLM). Ideally, full-persona twins would behave more similarly to humans than to
empty-persona twins. We find the opposite: full-persona twins are closer to empty-persona twins
than they are to humans (𝑀 𝐴𝐷 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑣𝑠. 𝑒𝑚 𝑝𝑡𝑦 = 0.175, 𝑀 𝐴𝐷 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑣𝑠. ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑠 = 0.252, 𝑝 < 0.01).
   In sum, we find that digital twins distort human behavior by insufficiently deviating from the
base model. This yields the first benchmark for progress: comparing standard deviation of twin
responses to human responses. If full-persona twins approximate the standard deviation of human
responses, this suggests that twins have overcome the homogenization that plagues LLMs.


2. Stereotyping

We have shown that digital twins do not deviate sufficiently from the base LLM. To the extent they
deviate, do they do so in a way that over-relies on generic characteristics such as demographics?
Previous research has documented that LLMs prompted to mimic specific demographic groups
tend to provide answers that are stereotypical of these groups (24, 16). Here again, we explore
whether augmenting persona description with rich individual-level data is enough to correct such

                                                  14
phenomenon.
   The fact that full-persona twins achieve only slightly higher individual-level accuracy than those
based only on demographic information provides initial evidence for demographic-based stereotyp-
ing. However, to test this more directly, we compute the mean absolute deviation (MAD) between
the answers (normalized between 0 and 1) given by full-persona twins vs. demographics-only twins.
The average MAD across outcomes is 0.132, which is significantly lower than the average MAD
we reported above between full-persona twins and empty-persona twins (𝑀 𝐴𝐷 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑣𝑠. 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎 𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑠 =
0.132, 𝑀 𝐴𝐷 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑣𝑠. 𝑒𝑚 𝑝𝑡𝑦 = 0.175, 𝑝 < 0.01) or the actual human answers (𝑀 𝐴𝐷 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑣𝑠. 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑔𝑟𝑎 𝑝ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑠 =
0.132, 𝑀 𝐴𝐷 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 𝑣𝑠. ℎ𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑠 = 0.252, 𝑝 < 0.01). That is, answers from full-persona twins are closer
to those from demographics-only twins than to those from empty-persona twins or real humans.
This suggests that digital twins rely heavily on demographic characteristics rather than the wealth
of additional individual-level information they were provided.
   As discussed earlier, correlation on the other hand improves more substantially when using full
vs. demographics-only personas. This suggests that, to the extent full-persona twins deviate from
demographics-only twins, they do so in a way that is somewhat consistent with variations across
humans.
   It may be counter-intuitive that full personas significantly improve correlation compared to
demographics-based personas, without improving accuracy. However, accuracy and correlation
are distinct constructs. To illustrate the distinction between improving correlation and improving
individual-level accuracy, we select one outcome (Lack of Control) from one sub-study (Substudy
2, Affective Primes), for which the distinction between individual-level accuracy and correlation
is particularly sharp. Fig. 3 reports scatter plots of the predictions from synthetic personas created
using demographics only versus human responses (left panel), and predictions from digital twins
created using full personas versus human responses (right panel). These plots clearly illustrate how
the correlation is much improved when full personas are used (𝑟 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜 = 0.105 versus 𝑟 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 = .555).
Yet, individual-level accuracy (captured by the average distance of each point to the 45° line) is
virtually unchanged (𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑜 = 0.892 versus 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 𝑓 𝑢𝑙𝑙 = 0.907).
   To illustrate this comparison more concretely, consider two people with similar demographics.
One person rates themselves a 2 out of 7 and the other rates themselves a 4 out of 7 on feeling a
lack of control. Using demographics only, the twins might report 3 for each, 1 point away from


                                                  15
Figure 3: Human Responses versus Digital Twin Responses Based on Demographics Only
(Left) and Full Persona (Right), for One Particular Outcome. The 45° line is included. This
scatter plot illustrates how correlation may be improved when full personas are used, without
significant change to individual-level accuracy (captured by the average distance of each point to
the 45° line).

the human’s actual response on average. Using the full persona, the twins might now report 3 and
5 respectively, still 1 point off on average, failing to capture the individual’s subjective experience
to a similar extent, but now capturing the relative difference across people. This suggests that
personalized twins can sort people more accurately (who feels more or less control) but still fail to
capture individuals’ actual cognition and subjective experiences. Note that individual-level accuracy
should not be confused with other aggregate measures of accuracy, such as the accuracy of the
average difference between groups of participants (e.g., average treatment effect). Such measures
may be more strongly impacted by improvements in correlation.
   In sum, one way digital twins distort human behavior is by over-relying on demographic
information rather than modeling the complexity of individual cognition. This yields the second
benchmark for progress: comparing responses of full-persona twins to those of (1) demographic
personas, (2) empty personas, and (3) humans. If full-persona twins are closer to demographic
personas than humans, that suggests an over-reliance on demographics at the expense of true


                                                  16
individuation.


3. Representation Bias

We have so far documented two distortions that can explain inaccuracy. But is this inaccuracy
uniform across the humans that digital twins are attempting to represent? As training data are
typically based on corpora that systematically over-represent certain demographics (25), previous
research has shown that LLMs struggle to reflect the opinions of certain demographic groups
(26, 13). Does creating digital twins using demographic data combined with extensive individual-
level data address this issue? To explore this, we compute accuracy (across all outcomes) between
each participant’s normalized responses and those of their twin.11 We then analyze how this accuracy
relates to participants’ demographic characteristics. All demographic variables are dummy-coded,
yielding 61 demographic dummy variables coming from the 14 demographic questions. To identify
which participant characteristics are most predictive of digital twin performance, we train an
XGBoost (Extreme Gradient Boosting) model to predict twin accuracy using these features (27).
    To interpret the model’s findings, we generate grouped partial dependence plots (PDPs) for each
categorical variable. PDPs visualize the average predicted accuracy for each level of a feature while
holding all other variables constant. For example, the PDP for political ideology shows predicted
accuracy for participants identifying as “Very Conservative,” “Liberal,” “Moderate,” “Liberal,” and
“Very Liberal” on a single chart, enabling direct comparison across different demographic groups.
Plots for education, income, religious attendance, and political views are presented in Fig. 4, while
the remaining plots are in the SI.
    Our findings suggest representation bias, i.e., systematic differences in twin accuracy across
demographic groups (28). Twins tend to be more accurate for participants with higher education
levels and higher income, indicating a potential bias in favor of more socioeconomically advantaged
individuals, which could exacerbate a focus on WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich,
Democratic) populations in the social sciences (26, 29). Accuracy also tends to be higher for
participants with moderate political views and religious attendance habits.
    In sum, this differential accuracy constitutes another distortion: digital twins systematically
  11 We use accuracy for this analysis as a more natural way to compare the answers between a particular human and

their twin across outcomes.


                                                       17
Figure 4: Partial Dependence Plots for Understanding Heterogeneity in Digital Twin Perfor-
mance. Twins tend to be more accurate for participants with higher education levels and higher
income, as well as those with moderate political views and religious attendance habits.

misrepresent certain groups more than others. This yields the third benchmark for progress: visual-
izing partial dependence plots across segments (such as demographic or psychographic variables).
Flat plots suggest that these different groups of people are represented equally well by their digital
twins.


4. Ideological Biases

The first three distortions discussed above represent failures to capture individual cognition by
over-relying on demographic information, insufficiently adjusting away from the base model, or
insufficiently capturing the specific behaviors of certain groups. These can be seen as errors of



                                                 18
omission. However, another possible avenue of distortion is the introduction of bias in responses.
Our data provide a unique opportunity to contribute to the growing literature on LLM biases by
directly comparing opinions expressed by humans to those expressed by an LLM instructed to
mimic those humans, across a wide range of substantive areas.
   Specifically, in addition to 164 detailed outcomes (e.g., willingness to share a particular article
on social media, likelihood of applying for a particular job), we also pre-registered 31 higher-level
comparisons between digital twins and humans (1-4 comparisons per sub-study). These compar-
isons evaluated whether twins responded similarly to humans on average to a particular question
or set of questions (e.g., “How does the knowledge of digital twins regarding fees and surcharges
in the marketplace compare to that of their human counterparts?”), whether they replicated known
treatment effects (e.g., “Can digital twins demonstrate default effects?”), etc. A complete list of
these comparisons and their results is available in the SI; we only highlight a subset here, which
reveal systematic ways in which the content of digital twin answers differ from that of humans. In
particular, our diverse mega-study allowed us to uncover subtle ideological biases embedded in the
twins’ responses.
   Specifically, we found that twins tended to express views that were often more “pro-human”
than those expressed by humans. For example, compared to their human counterparts, twins were
more likely to believe that people are fair and can be trusted (Substudy 15), that people should
take care of themselves (Substudy 15), and were relatively more favorable to people who donate to
both political parties (Substudy 16). They were also more favorable toward government regulation
of fees and surcharges in the marketplace (Substudy 7), and more willing to pay taxes to improve
healthcare for all people (Substudy 15).
   Interestingly, at the same time, twins also tended to express views that could be described as
“pro-technology.” In particular, twins tended to provide answers that were consistent with a view of
technology as a safe tool under the control of humans (e.g., Substudies 6, 9, 14, 19). For example,
twins were relatively more accepting of algorithmic hiring compared to their human counterparts
(Substudy 9), perceived online targeting as less intrusive on their privacy (Substudy 14), and
under-reported usage of platforms like Netflix and TikTok (Substudy 19). While it is possible to be
simultaneously “pro-human” and “pro-technology,” do digital twins show any preference in favor of
humans versus technology? When asked to rate the creativity of ideas (Substudy 10), twins showed


                                                 19
human aversion (rating ideas from humans lower due to their source).
   These biases may come from various inputs into the base model. In particular, they may
be reflected in the training corpus of the base model, or they may have been acquired through
Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (13) or through the base model’s system prompt
which provides overarching instructions on how the model should behave. Irrespective of their exact
sources, they imply that blindly deploying digital twins might lead to distorted conclusions about
human behavior and opinions, which may, sometimes in very subtle ways, push specific ideological
agendas.
   In sum, we find that digital twins distort human behavior by exerting ideological sway. This
yields the fourth benchmark for progress: checking for systematic ideological biases (including
pro-technology, pro-social, and pro-human biases) by testing whether human-twin divergences are
consistently in a specific direction across substantive domains.


5. Hyper-rationality

Another form of bias that may be introduced by digital twins relates to cognitive skills. Specifically,
one of the features of LLMs—their vast knowledge base—may be a source of error when it comes to
predicting human behavior. Indeed, prior work finds that LLMs suffer from hyper-accuracy (30,18).
Does training digital twins on extensive data, including response from numerous cognitive tests,
help replicate human’s imperfect knowledge and cognitive skills? Or, akin to the curse of knowledge
in humans (31), are digital twins unable to “forget” their base knowledge leading them to behave
as more informed, rational agents? We first examined this question in sub-studies that contained
questions with objectively correct answers (Substudies 7,19). We find that twins tended to display
perfect knowledge, deviating from human participants.
   We next examined this distortion for substudies that contained questions that test rationality.
We again find evidence of hyper-rationality distortion: twins were more likely to select normative
answers reflective of higher cognitive abilities, e.g., by selecting answers associated with stronger
quantitative intuition (Substudy 17) or by being more likely to strategically consume online content
in order to influence future recommendations (Substudy 19). Twins also failed to replicate the
attraction and compromise effects (Substudy 4), which are indicators of bounded rationality. How-
ever, an interesting phenomenon emerges when using a well-known, published paradigm. Here,

                                                  20
twins were more likely to show the effect, probably due to the phenomenon of leakage, whereby
the answer is directly influenced by information contained in the training corpus (19). For example,
digital twins did not replicate a default effect using a novel paradigm (Substudy 5), but they did
display a strong default effect using a classic paradigm (32). Other substudies (e.g., Substudy 1)
confirmed the tendency of digital twins to behave consistently with the literature when a clear
prediction could be made. This highlights a key contribution of our megastudy: we are the first to
systematically test twins across both established and novel paradigms.
   In sum, digital twins distort human behavior by imposing a hyper-rational lens. This yields the
final benchmark for progress: testing twin performance in novel contexts that contain objectively
correct answers and test rationality. If twins deviate less from correct responses than humans, and
if twins display irrationality at lower rates to humans, this suggests that they are still subject to the
hyper-rationality bias in LLMs.



Discussion
Although many are rushing to simulate surveys and experiments using digital twins of humans, little
is known about how responses from digital twins compare to those of their human counterparts.
Further, there is little understanding of the best way to construct digital twins, the domains of
application in which digital twins are likely to be accurate, or on the profiles of humans whose
digital twins are likely to be more accurate. Deploying digital twins without answering these
fundamental questions risks misrepresenting human cognition in ways that could undermine both
scientific understanding and practical applications. In order to help advance knowledge on digital
twins, we ran a pre-registered mega-study (and make the data publicly available) that: (i) allows
matching the answers of digital twins to those of their human counterparts, (ii) covers a wide range
of application domains, and (iii) involves a relatively large, representative sample of participants.
   We find that although digital twins show promise, they are not yet “ready for primetime.” Digital
twins capture individual cognition only minimally better than empty personas. However, twins
show slightly more promise when it comes to sorting people. This distinction is consequential for
understanding when indiscriminate twin use may mislead decision-makers. For example, although
twins may be able to modestly estimate relative receptiveness to a policy (identifying who is more


                                                   21
or less likely to respond positively), they are barely better at predicting an individual’s likelihood
to agree with a given policy than a base LLM.
   Could human experts have predicted these results? To assess whether empirical tests are valuable
and potentially corrective in the domain of digital twins, we asked a sample of 68 expert respondents
(primarily scholars and managers) to estimate average outcomes in five of our experimental studies
representing different paradigms. We asked separately for the average outcome for humans and
their twins in a treatment condition (e.g., likelihood of staying enrolled in a green energy plan
when enrolled by default), providing the average outcome in the control condition as baseline (e.g.,
likelihood of actively choosing the green energy plan when enrolled in another plan by default).
Overall, the pattern suggested that respondents’ predictions were less accurate for twins than for
humans (see SI). Comparing the predicted outcome in the treatment condition to its value in the
control condition also yields estimated treatment effects. While the observed average treatment effect
among humans was within the 95% confidence interval of predictions made by our participants in
all five cases, the average treatment effect among twins was outside the 95% confidence interval
in three cases. This suggests that human experts struggle to predict the behavior of digital twins,
highlighting the importance of our rigorous examination.
   Beyond performance metrics, our analysis highlights five systematic ways in which digital twins
distort human responses. First, we find that digital twins suffer from insufficient individuation,
providing answers that remain under-differentiated and under-dispersed relative to human answers.
Second, we find evidence of demographics-based stereotyping. Third, digital twin predictions
suffer from representation bias, as they tend to be more accurate for certain demographic groups of
participants with higher education levels, higher income, and moderate political views and religious
attendance habits. Fourth, digital twins tend to display ideological biases, for example, they appear
to be at the same time “pro-human” and “pro-technology.” Fifth, digital twins tend to display
hyper-rationality, with answers reflecting higher rationality and knowledge compared to humans.
   These results culminate in the conclusion that the digital twins of today may best be described as
funhouse mirrors that systematically distort human behavior. Stakeholders deploying digital twins
risk making consequential decisions based on an illusion of personalization rather than genuine
individual-level insight. These systems are better characterized as “comparative profiles” imbued
with LLM biases, not faithful twins of human cognition. Consequently, the premature deployment


                                                 22
of these twins risks smoothing out individual voices, mispredicting ignorance and irrationality,
reinforcing stereotypes, and introducing novel biases, such as pro-technology attitudes and AI-
favoritism.



Future Directions
The five types of distortions we document are consistent with previous research on synthetic data,
suggesting that despite their promise, digital twins are currently unable to address limitations of
synthetic data. By empirically consolidating findings scattered across the literature into a list of
distortions in a single mega-study, we offer a unified evaluative framework: a roadmap with clear
guidance on specific ways in which the behavior of digital twins should be corrected before this
technology may be deployed safely, with a clear set of indicators on which future methodologies
can be measured.
    How might future research address these current distortions? Recall that leveraging digital twins
involves making out-of-distribution predictions using a base LLM augmented with individual-level
data (the twin’s “blueprint”). We compare digital twins to a traditional machine learning approach
in order explore the extent to which the modest performance of digital twins (and therefore, future
potential improvements) lie in the blueprint data being insufficiently informative vs. the LLM being
unable to fully leverage these data for out-of-distribution predictions. Unlike digital twins, which
are able to make out-of-distribution predictions on completely new questions, traditional machine
learning models require collecting responses from a subset of the sample, training a model that
connects a set of personal characteristics to these responses, and then predicting out-of-sample
responses for the rest of the sample (given their personal characteristics).
    We consider a case in which an XGBoost model is trained separately for each outcome based
on the value of that outcome for a sub-sample of participants and their full persona information
(i.e., the same information used for full-persona digital twins).12 We also consider an XGBoost
model trained on demographic variables only. Comparing the performance of a given model with
full-persona information vs. demographics-only information sheds light on the intrinsic value of
  12 We focus on the 106 outcomes for which sample size was greater than 650, and vary the size of the training sample

from 50 to 650. We also set temperature to 0 for digital twins, as this improves their performance (see SI for details).



                                                           23
the twins’ blueprint data. Comparing the performance of the XGBoost model to that of digital
twins holding the persona information constant sheds light on the base model’s ability to leverage
individual-level data for out-of-distribution predictions.
   Looking first at correlation (see Fig. 5), comparing each model with full personas vs. demographics-
only personas reveals that the full-persona blueprint data helps both digital twins and the XGBoost
improve performance. However, even as the size of the training sample reaches 650, the predictive
correlation achieved by the full-persona XGBoost model remains below 0.29. This suggests that,
despite being extensive and based on decades of social science research, the twins’ blueprint data
has limited intrinsic potential to capture human behavior in our context. At the same time, we
see that full-persona digital twins reach a predictive correlation equivalent to that achieved by
the full-persona XGBoost model trained on approximately 180 participants. In the demographics-
only case, the number increases to approximately 225 participants. In other words, given a set
of individual-level characteristics, the base LLM is able to make out-of-distribution predictions
that achieve the same correlation with human answers as out-of-sample predictions made by an
XGBoost model trained on approximately 200 human answers (i.e., that require running the actual
study on approximately 200 participants).
   When it comes to accuracy (Fig. 6), the XGBoost model trained on the full data is only
marginally better than the XGBoost model trained on demographics only (and similarly for digital
twins), suggesting that the twins’ blueprint data is only marginally informative of the idiosyncratic
patterns in responses. Moreover, digital twins are only as good as XGBoost trained on approximately
75 human responses on average, suggesting that it is harder for the LLM to leverage these data to
make out-of-distribution predictions that would be accurate at the individual level.
   In sum, this analysis suggests that the twins’ blueprint data, despite being based on a large
number of scales and measures developed over decades of social science research and despite being
the most comprehensive dataset for the creation of digital twins publicly available to date, are far
from sufficient to fully align digital twins’ answers to those of their human counterparts. Predicting
human behavior in our context is probably intrinsically challenging and performance expectations
need to be appropriately calibrated, and/or that new scales and measures may need to be developed
to better capture human cognition. This analysis further suggests that the blueprint data is relatively
more informative of variations across people and that LLMs are able to leverage these data to make


                                                  24
Figure 5: Comparison with Traditional Machine Learning Method: Correlation. We compare
digital twins (plain lines) to an XGBoost model (dashed lines) trained for each outcome using
additional data not needed or used by digital twins: responses for that outcome from a training
subset of participants. We consider versions of each model based on full-persona information
(darker colors) vs. demographics only (lighter colors). The full-persona information helps both
digital twins and the XGBoost improve performance. However, even as the size of the training
sample reaches 650, the predictive correlation achieved by the full-persona XGBoost model remains
below 0.29. Holding the set of individual-level characteristics constant, the base LLM is able to
make out-of-distribution predictions that achieve the same correlation with human answers as out-
of-sample predictions made by an XGBoost model trained on approximately 200 human answers.

out-of-distribution predictions that capture some variation across people (e.g., whether one person
will score higher or lower than another), while not being necessarily more accurate at the individual
level (e.g., whether one person would answer a 6 vs. a 7 on a scale).
   Similarly, what role does the base LLM versus individual-level information play in shaping the
behavior of digital twins and the distortions we observe? One may speculate, and test in future


                                                 25
Figure 6: Comparison with Traditional Machine Learning Method: Accuracy. We compare
digital twins (plain lines) to an XGBoost model (dashed lines) trained for each outcome using
additional data not needed or used by digital twins: responses for that outcome from a training
subset of participants. We consider versions of each model based on full-persona information (darker
colors) vs. demographics only (lighter colors). The full-persona information only marginally helps
improve individual-level accuracy. Moreover, digital twins are only as good as XGBoost trained on
approximately 75 human responses on average, suggesting that it is harder for the LLM to leverage
these data to make out-of-distribution predictions that would be accurate at the individual level.

research, that several of the distortions we observe are due to properties of the base LLM being
transferred to digital twins. For example, ideological biases and hyper-rationality likely stem from
the base LLM powering the digital twins. It is similarly quite plausible that representation bias is
linked to certain groups (e.g., higher education, moderate views) being better represented in the
base model’s training data. And the insufficient individuation of answers by digital twins is probably
the result of the homogeneity of the base model not being sufficiently offset by the individual-level
information contained in digital twins.


                                                 26
   Of course, a base model is required to enable digital twins to process and generate unstructured
data, and to make out-of-distribution predictions without additional training data. But future re-
search might find optimal ways to combine the capabilities of one (or potentially an ensemble of)
base LLM(s) with rich individual-level information. We hope our data will encourage the develop-
ment of improved pipelines for digital twins that address some of the limitations uncovered in our
analysis.
   Finally, our findings also raise the question of how we should reasonably think about digital
twins. In particular, based on our results, it may not be realistic to think about them as “clones”
of humans, but rather as hyper-rational, quasi-omniscient versions of humans, with implicit values
partly imbued by their base LLM. This perspective may influence which use cases are more
promising for future research and practical applications. Perhaps use cases that consider digital
twins as well-informed advisors are more promising than use cases that consider digital twins as
carbon copies of their human counterparts.
   In sum, digital twins hold genuine promise in revolutionizing how we study human behavior.
But realizing this promise requires rigorous empirical foundations. We hope that our evaluative
framework, publicly available data and code, and detailed analysis of each study (see SI), provide
the data-driven scaffolding needed to reach digital twins’ full potential.



Materials and Methods
Each sub-study was first run on Prolific according to its pre-registered plan (https://researchbox.org/4145).
All sub-studies were run from the same Prolific account to ensure consistency. Invitations were sent
to Prolific participants from the Twin-2K-500 panel. Each sub-study was approved by Columbia
University’s IRB. All sub-studies were run from April to June 2025.
   Next, each sub-study was conducted on the digital twins of its participants. To set up the
simulation, we extracted twin information from the Twin-2K-500 dataset and provided it as prompt
input. For each human participant, the completed survey was transformed into text, stripped of its
answers, and incorporated into the user prompt. Survey questions varied across participants due to
randomization; we preserved these differences when generating inputs for their twins. The LLM was
then tasked with producing responses to these surveys. The creation of digital twins and the related


                                                  27
computations were approved by Columbia University’s IRB under Protocol IRB-AAAV5832.
   For each persona in each sub-study, we constructed a user prompt using a template (see SI)
and queried the LLM via its API (OpenAI API for OpenAI models, OpenRouter API for others).
The JSON outputs were then post-processed to ensure all questions were answered in the required
format (e.g., no missing values or out-of-range responses). If validation failed, the API call was
retried. A complete version of the prompt template, including placeholders for persona profiles,
new questions, and JSON-based response formatting, is provided in the SI.



References
 1. L. P. Argyle, et al., Out of one, many: Using language models to simulate human samples.
    Political Analysis 31 (3), 337–351 (2023).

 2. D. Dillion, N. Tandon, Y. Gu, K. Gray, Can AI language models replace human participants?
    Trends in Cognitive Sciences 27 (7), 597–600 (2023).

 3. J. J. Horton, Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn from
    homo silicus?, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2023).

 4. L. Hewitt, A. Ashokkumar, I. Ghezae, R. Willer, Predicting results of social science experiments
    using large language models. Preprint (2024).

 5. C. R. Jones, B. K. Bergen, Large language models pass the turing test. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2503.23674 (2025).

 6. S. J. Westwood, The potential existential threat of large language models to online survey
    research. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 122 (47), e2518075122 (2025).

 7. Z. Cui, N. Li, H. Zhou, A large-scale replication of scenario-based experiments in psychology
    and management using large language models. Nature Computational Science pp. 1–8 (2025).

 8. D. Broska, M. Howes, A. van Loon, The mixed subjects design: Treating large language models
    as potentially informative observations. Sociological Methods & Research 54 (3), 1074–1109
    (2025).

                                                 28
 9. S. Schröder, T. Morgenroth, U. Kuhl, V. Vaquet, B. Paaßen, Large language models do not
    simulate human psychology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06950 (2025).

10. Y. Gao, D. Lee, G. Burtch, S. Fazelpour, Take caution in using LLMs as human surrogates.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 122 (24), e2501660122 (2025).

11. J. Bisbee, J. D. Clinton, C. Dorff, B. Kenkel, J. M. Larson, Synthetic replacements for human
    survey data? the perils of large language models. Political Analysis 32 (4), 401–416 (2024).

12. Z. Lin, Six fallacies in substituting large language models for human participants. Advances in
    Methods and Practices in Psychological Science 8 (3), 25152459251357566 (2025).

13. S. Santurkar, et al., Whose opinions do language models reflect?, in Proceedings of the 40th
    International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR) (2023), pp. 29971–30004.

14. F. Motoki, V. Pinho Neto, V. Rodrigues, More human than human: measuring ChatGPT political
    bias. Public Choice 198 (1), 3–23 (2024).

15. A. Li, H. Chen, H. Namkoong, T. Peng, LLM Generated Persona is a Promise with a Catch.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16527 (2025).

16. A. Wang, J. Morgenstern, J. P. Dickerson, Large language models that replace human partici-
    pants can harmfully misportray and flatten identity groups. Nature Machine Intelligence 7 (3),
    400–411 (2025).

17. J. S. Park, et al., Generative agent simulations of 1,000 people. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10109
    (2024).

18. O. Toubia, et al., Database Report: Twin-2K-500: A Data Set for Building Digital Twins of
    over 2,000 People Based on Their Answers to over 500 Questions. Marketing Science (2025).

19. J. Ludwig, S. Mullainathan, A. Rambachan, Large language models: An applied econometric
    framework, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research (2025).

20. A. Kolluri, S. Wu, J. S. Park, M. S. Bernstein, Finetuning LLMs for Human Behavior Prediction
    in Social Science Experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05830 (2025).


                                                 29
21. J. P. Beauchamp, D. Cesarini, M. Johannesson, E. Lindqvist, C. Apicella, On the sources of
    the height–intelligence correlation: New insights from a bivariate ACE model with assortative
    mating. Behavior genetics 41 (2), 242–252 (2011).

22. M. Binz, et al., A foundation model to predict and capture human cognition. Nature pp. 1–8
    (2025).

23. G. Gui, O. Toubia, The challenge of using llms to simulate human behavior: A causal inference
    perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15524 (2025).

24. S. Gupta, et al., Bias runs deep: Implicit reasoning biases in persona-assigned llms. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:2311.04892 (2023).

25. J. Dodge, et al., Documenting large webtext corpora: A case study on the colossal clean crawled
    corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08758 (2021).

26. A. Zewail, A. Figueroa, J. Graham, M. Atari, Moral stereotyping in large language models.
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 123 (10), e2519941123 (2026).

27. T. Chen, C. Guestrin, Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system, in Proceedings of the 22nd acm
    sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (2016), pp. 785–794.

28. N. Shahbazi, Y. Lin, A. Asudeh, H. Jagadish, Representation bias in data: A survey on identi-
    fication and resolution techniques. ACM Computing Surveys 55 (13s), 1–39 (2023).

29. J. Henrich, S. J. Heine, A. Norenzayan, The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and
    brain sciences 33 (2-3), 61–83 (2010).

30. G. V. Aher, R. I. Arriaga, A. T. Kalai, Using large language models to simulate multiple humans
    and replicate human subject studies, in International conference on machine learning (PMLR)
    (2023), pp. 337–371.

31. C. Camerer, G. Loewenstein, M. Weber, The curse of knowledge in economic settings: An
    experimental analysis. Journal of political Economy 97 (5), 1232–1254 (1989).

32. E. J. Johnson, D. Goldstein, Do Defaults Save Lives? Science 302 (5649), 1338–1339 (2003),
    doi:10.1126/science.1091721, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091721.

                                                30
33. J. Huber, J. W. Payne, C. Puto, Adding Asymmetrically Dominated Alternatives: Violations of
    Regularity and the Similarity Hypothesis. Journal of Consumer Research 9 (1), 90–98 (1982),
    doi:10.1086/208899, https://doi.org/10.1086/208899.

34. I. Simonson, Choice Based on Reasons: The Case of Attraction and Compromise Effects.
    Journal of Consumer Research 16 (2), 158–174 (1989), doi:10.1086/209205, https://doi.
    org/10.1086/209205.

35. D. Pichert, K. V. Katsikopoulos, Green Defaults: Information Presentation and Pro-
    Environmental Behaviour. Journal of Environmental Psychology 28 (1), 63–73 (2008), doi:
    10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.09.004, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.09.004.

36. P. Briñol, M. J. McCaslin, R. E. Petty, Self-Generated Persuasion: Effects of the Target and
    Direction of Arguments. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 102 (5), 925–940
    (2012), epub 2012 Feb 20, doi:10.1037/a0027231, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0027231.

37. G. Pennycook, D. G. Rand, The Psychology of Fake News. Trends in Cognitive Sciences
    25 (5), 388–402 (2021), doi:10.1016/j.tics.2021.02.007, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    tics.2021.02.007.

38. G. Pennycook, et al., Shifting Attention to Accuracy Can Reduce Misinformation Online. Na-
    ture 592, 590–595 (2021), doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03344-2, https://doi.org/10.1038/
    s41586-021-03344-2.

39. K. Lane, M. Brucks, A Marketing Perspective on Misinformation Sharing: How the Target
    Audience Shapes Consumers’ Focus on Accuracy vs. Entertainment (2025), working paper.

40. T. Harcup, D. O’Neill, What Is News? News Values Revisited (Again). Journalism Studies
    18 (12), 1470–1488 (2016), doi:10.1080/1461670X.2016.1150193, https://doi.org/10.
    1080/1461670X.2016.1150193.

41. Reuters Institute, Digital News Report 2023, Tech. rep., University of Oxford (2023),
    https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/2023-06/
    Digital_News_Report_2023.pdf, retrieved from Reuters Institute for the Study of
    Journalism.

                                               31
42. R. Widjaya, S. Bestvater, A. Smith, Who U.S. Adults Follow on TikTok, Tech. rep.,
    Pew Research Center (2024), https://www.pewresearch.org/data-labs/2024/10/08/
    who-u-s-adults-follow-on-tiktok/.

43. J. Berger, E. M. Schwartz, What Drives Immediate and Ongoing Word of Mouth? Journal of
    Marketing Research 48 (5), 869–880 (2011), doi:10.1509/jmkr.48.5.869, https://doi.org/
    10.1509/jmkr.48.5.869.

44. J. Berger, K. L. Milkman, What Makes Online Content Viral? Journal of Marketing Research
    49 (2), 192–205 (2012), doi:10.1509/jmr.10.0353, https://doi.org/10.1509/jmr.10.
    0353.

45. J. Berger, Arousal Increases Social Transmission of Information. Psychological Science
    22 (7), 891–893 (2011), doi:10.1177/0956797611413294, https://doi.org/10.1177/
    0956797611413294.

46. R. A. Emmons, M. E. McCullough, Counting Blessings Versus Burdens: An Experimental
    Investigation of Gratitude and Subjective Well-Being in Daily Life. Journal of Personality
    and Social Psychology 84 (2), 377–389 (2003), doi:10.1037//0022-3514.84.2.377, https:
    //doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.84.2.377.

47. D. DeSteno, Y. Li, L. Dickens, J. S. Lerner, Gratitude: A Tool for Reducing Economic Im-
    patience. Psychological Science 25 (6), 1262–1267 (2014), doi:10.1177/0956797614529979,
    https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797614529979.

48. R. Oguni, C. Ishii, Gratitude Promotes Prosocial Behavior Even in Uncertain Situation. Sci-
    entific Reports 14, 14379 (2024), doi:10.1038/s41598-024-65460-z, https://doi.org/10.
    1038/s41598-024-65460-z.

49. M. Bukowski, A. Potoczek, K. Barzykowski, others, What Do We Manipulate When Re-
    minding People of (Not) Having Control? In Search of Construct Validity. Behavior Research
    Methods 56, 3706–3724 (2024), doi:10.3758/s13428-023-02326-8, https://doi.org/10.
    3758/s13428-023-02326-8.



                                              32
50. C. Y. Chen, L. Lee, A. J. Yap, Control Deprivation Motivates Acquisition of Utilitarian
    Products. Journal of Consumer Research 43 (6), 1031–1047 (2017), doi:10.1093/jcr/ucw068,
    https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucw068.

51. C. Lembregts, M. Pandelaere, Falling Back on Numbers: When Preference for Numerical
    Product Information Increases after a Personal Control Threat. Journal of Marketing Re-
    search 56 (1), 104–122 (2018), doi:10.1177/0022243718820570, https://doi.org/10.
    1177/0022243718820570.

52. J. A. Whitson, A. D. Galinsky, Lacking Control Increases Illusory Pattern Perception. Science
    322 (5898), 115–117 (2008), doi:10.1126/science.1159845, https://doi.org/10.1126/
    science.1159845.

53. S. Schnall, J. Roper, D. M. T. Fessler, Elevation Leads to Altruistic Behavior. Psychological
    Science 21 (3), 315–320 (2010), doi:10.1177/0956797609359882, https://doi.org/10.
    1177/0956797609359882.

54. L. C. Walsh, C. N. Armenta, G. Itzchakov, M. M. Fritz, S. Lyubomirsky, More Than Merely
    Positive: The Immediate Affective and Motivational Consequences of Gratitude. Sustainability
    14 (14), 8679 (2022), doi:10.3390/su14148679, https://doi.org/10.3390/su14148679.

55. R. Oliveira, A. Baldé, M. Madeira, T. Ribeiro, P. Arriaga, The Impact of Writing About
    Gratitude on the Intention to Engage in Prosocial Behaviors During the COVID-19 Outbreak.
    Frontiers in Psychology 12, 588691 (2021), doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.588691, https://www.
    frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.588691.

56. K. H. Greenaway, et al., From “We” to “Me”: Group Identification Enhances Perceived Personal
    Control with Consequences for Health and Well-Being. Journal of Personality and Social
    Psychology 109 (1), 53–74 (2015), doi:10.1037/pspi0000019, https://doi.org/10.1037/
    pspi0000019.

57. G. Sedek, M. Kofta, When Cognitive Exertion Does Not Yield Cognitive Gain: Toward an
    Informational Explanation of Learned Helplessness. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-



                                               33
    chology 58 (4), 729–743 (1990), doi:10.1037//0022-3514.58.4.729, https://doi.org/10.
    1037//0022-3514.58.4.729.

58. D. M. Webster, A. W. Kruglanski, Individual Differences in Need for Cognitive Closure. Jour-
    nal of Personality and Social Psychology 67 (6), 1049–1062 (1994), doi:10.1037//0022-3514.
    67.6.1049, https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.67.6.1049.

59. T. Zhang, V. Kishore, F. Wu, K. Q. Weinberger, Y. Artzi, BERTScore: Evaluating Text Gener-
    ation with BERT (2020), https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.09675.

60. A. V. Wilson, S. Bellezza, Consumer Minimalism. Journal of Consumer Research 48 (5),
    796–816 (2022), doi:10.1093/jcr/ucab038, https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucab038.

61. J. M. Jachimowicz, S. Duncan, E. U. Weber, E. J. Johnson, When and Why Defaults Influence
    Decisions: A Meta-Analysis of Default Effects. Behavioural Public Policy 3 (2), 159–186
    (2019), doi:10.1017/bpp.2018.43, https://doi.org/10.1017/bpp.2018.43.

62. K. L. Keller, Managing the Growth Tradeoff: Challenges and Opportunities in Luxury Brand-
    ing, in Advances in Luxury Brand Management, J.-N. Kapferer, J. Kernstock, T. Brexendorf,
    S. Powell, Eds., Journal of Brand Management: Advanced Collections (Palgrave Macmillan,
    Cham) (2017), doi:10.1007/978-3-319-51127-6 9.

63. S. Bellezza, A. Keinan, Brand Tourists: How Non–Core Users Enhance the Brand Image by
    Eliciting Pride. Journal of Consumer Research 41 (2), 397–417 (2014), doi:10.1086/676679,
    https://doi.org/10.1086/676679.

64. E. Park, K. Lane, S. Bellezza, NFT for Conspicuous Consumption, in Advances in Consumer
    Research, Volume 50, H. A. Chen, G. Eckhardt, R. Hamilton, Eds. (Association for Consumer
    Research, Duluth, MN) (2022), conference held in Denver, CO.

65. Human Rights Watch, EU Parliament Approves Supply Chain Law, News re-
    lease,   Human    Rights   Watch   (2024),     https://www.hrw.org/news/2024/04/24/
    eu-parliament-approves-supply-chain-law, accessed: 2025-09-27.




                                              34
66. P. J. Curran, S. G. West, J. F. Finch, The Robustness of Test Statistics to Nonnormality and
    Specification Error in Confirmatory Factor Analysis. Psychological Methods 1 (1), 16–29
    (1996), doi:10.1037/1082-989X.1.1.16, https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.1.1.16.

67. The White House, The President’s Initiative on Junk Fees and Related Pricing
    Practices,         https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/blog/2022/10/26/
    the-presidents-initiative-on-junk-fees-and-related-pricing-practices/
    (2022), accessed: 2025-09-25.

68. A. M. McCright, R. E. Dunlap, C. Xiao, Perceived Scientific Agreement and Support for
    Government Action on Climate Change in the USA. Climatic Change 119, 511–518 (2013),
    doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0704-9, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0704-9.

69. F. Dell’Acqua, B. Kogut, P. Perkowski, Super mario meets ai: Experimental effects of automa-
    tion and skills on team performance and coordination. Review of Economics and Statistics pp.
    1–16 (2025).

70. O. Toubia, et al., Database Report: Twin-2K-500: A Data Set for Building Digital Twins of
    over 2,000 People Based on Their Answers to over 500 Questions. Marketing Science 0 (0)
    (2025), doi:10.1287/mksc.2025.0262, https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2025.0262.

71. J. B. Kessler, C. Low, C. D. Sullivan, Incentivized resume rating: Eliciting employer preferences
    without deception. American Economic Review 109 (11), 3713–3744 (2019).

72. G. Rusak, B. S. Manning, J. J. Horton, AI Agents Can Enable Superior Market Designs (2025).

73. Y. Zhang, R. Gosline, Human Favoritism, Not AI Aversion: People’s Perceptions (and Bias)
    Toward Generative AI, Human Experts, and Human–GAI Collaboration in Persuasive Content
    Generation. Judgment and Decision Making 18, e41 (2023), doi:10.1017/jdm.2023.37, https:
    //doi.org/10.1017/jdm.2023.37.

74. S. Lewandowsky, S. van der Linden, Countering Misinformation and Fake News Through Inoc-
    ulation and Prebunking. European Review of Social Psychology 32 (2), 348–384 (2021), doi:10.
    1080/10463283.2021.1876983, https://doi.org/10.1080/10463283.2021.1876983.


                                                 35
75. G. Pennycook, D. G. Rand, Who Falls for Fake News? The Roles of Bullshit Receptivity,
    Overclaiming, Familiarity, and Analytic Thinking. Journal of Personality 88 (2), 185–200
    (2020), doi:10.1111/jopy.12476, https://doi.org/10.1111/jopy.12476.

76. G. Ceylan, I. A. Anderson, W. Wood, Sharing of Misinformation Is Habitual, Not Just Lazy
    or Biased. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 (4), e2216614120 (2023),
    doi:10.1073/pnas.2216614120, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2216614120.

77. S. Vosoughi, D. Roy, S. Aral, The Spread of True and False News Online. Science 359 (6380),
    1146–1151 (2018), doi:10.1126/science.aap9559, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
    aap9559.

78. J. J. Van Bavel, S. Rathje, M. Vlasceanu, C. Pretus, Updating the Identity-Based Model of
    Belief: From False Belief to the Spread of Misinformation. Current Opinion in Psychol-
    ogy 56, 101787 (2024), doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2023.101787, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
    copsyc.2023.101787.

79. B. K. Orme, K. Chrzan, Becoming an Expert in Conjoint Analysis: Choice Modeling for Pros
    (Sawtooth Software, Provo, UT) (2017).

80. L. Boussioux, J. N. Lane, M. Zhang, V. Jacimovic, K. R. Lakhani, The Crowdless Future?
    Generative AI and Creative Problem-Solving. Organization Science 35 (5), 1589–1607 (2024),
    doi:10.1287/orsc.2023.18430, https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2023.18430.

81. B. C. Lee, J. J. Chung, An Empirical Investigation of the Impact of ChatGPT on Cre-
    ativity. Nature Human Behaviour 8 (10), 1906–1914 (2024), epub 2024 Aug 12, doi:
    10.1038/s41562-024-01953-1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-01953-1.

82. K. Gray, et al., “Forward flow”: A new measure to quantify free thought and predict creativity.
    American Psychologist 74 (5), 539 (2019).

83. R. Catapano, Z. L. Tormala, D. D. Rucker, Perspective Taking and Self-Persuasion: Why
    “Putting Yourself in Their Shoes” Reduces Openness to Attitude Change. Psychological
    Science 30 (3), 424–435 (2019), doi:10.1177/0956797618822697, https://doi.org/10.
    1177/0956797618822697.

                                                36
84. A. Alesina, P. Giuliano, Preferences for Redistribution, in Handbook of Social Economics,
    J. Benhabib, A. Bisin, M. O. Jackson, Eds. (North-Holland, Amsterdam), vol. 1, chap. 4, pp.
    93–131 (2011), doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-53187-2.00004-8, https://doi.org/10.1016/
    B978-0-444-53187-2.00004-8.

85. M. Gilens, Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and Political Power in America
    (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ) (2012).

86. M. A. Hussein, C. Lee, S. C. Wheeler, How Do Consumers React to Ads That Meddle in
    Out-Party Primaries? Journal of Consumer Research 51 (6), 1186–1208 (2025), doi:10.1093/
    jcr/ucae039, https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucae039.

87. G. Heltzel, K. Laurin, Polarization in America: Two Possible Futures. Current Opinion in
    Behavioral Sciences 34, 179–184 (2020), doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.03.008, https://doi.
    org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2020.03.008.

88. Pew Research Center, As Partisan Hostility Grows, Signs of Frustration With
    the   Two-Party    System,      https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2022/08/09/
    as-partisan-hostility-grows-signs-of-frustration-with-the-two-party-system/
    (2022), accessed: 2025-09-25.

89. M. A. Hussein, Z. L. Tormala, Undermining Your Case to Enhance Your Impact: A Framework
    for Understanding the Effects of Acts of Receptiveness in Persuasion. Personality and Social
    Psychology Review 25 (3), 229–250 (2021), doi:10.1177/10888683211001269, https://
    doi.org/10.1177/10888683211001269.

90. M. A. Hussein, S. C. Wheeler, Reputational Costs of Receptiveness: When and Why Being
    Receptive to Opposing Political Views Backfires. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
    eral 153 (6), 1425–1448 (2024), doi:10.1037/xge0001579, https://doi.org/10.1037/
    xge0001579.

91. P. E. Green, V. Srinivasan, Conjoint Analysis in Consumer Research: Issues and Outlook.
    Journal of Consumer Research 5 (2), 103–123 (1978), doi:10.1086/208721, https://doi.
    org/10.1086/208721.

                                               37
92. C. J. Frank, P. F. Magnone, O. Netzer, Decisions Over Decimals: Striking the Balance Between
    Intuition and Information (John Wiley & Sons) (2022).

93. F. Shaddy, E. M. S. Friedman, O. Toubia, Fairness Perceptions in Demographic Targeting.
    Journal of Consumer Research (2025), ucaf048, doi:10.1093/jcr/ucaf048, https://doi.
    org/10.1093/jcr/ucaf048.

94. S. H. Cen, A. Ilyas, J. Allen, H. Li, A. Madry, Measuring Strategization in Recom-
    mendation: Users Adapt Their Behavior to Shape Future Content, in Proceedings of the
    25th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (EC ’24) (Association for Comput-
    ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA) (2024), pp. 203–204, doi:10.1145/3670865.3673634,
    https://doi.org/10.1145/3670865.3673634.



Acknowledgments
Caroline Weaver provided research assistance on the Context Effects and Defaults Effects substud-
ies as well as the design, implementation and analysis of the survey reported in SI.I. Xuwen Hua
provided research assistance on the Context Effects and Defaults Effects substudies. Arnab Choud-
hury provided research assistance on the Hiring Algorithms substudy. Sanjana Rosario provided
research assistance on the Quantitative Intuition substudy.


Author contributions:     G.G., D.J.M., M.B, E.J.J., V.M., A.A., S.B., D.D., H.F., E.F., A.G., M.H.,
K.J., B.K., A.K., K.L., H.L., P.P., O.N., O.T. designed the substudies, analyzed the data from each
substudy and wrote the corresponding sections in SI.J; O.T. ran the studies on human participants;
T.P., G.G., G.J.F., M.B.S., O.T. ran the studies on digital twins; T.P., G.G., D.J.M., G.J.F., M.B.S.,
O.T. produced the analyses reported in the main paper and SI.D-H; E.J.J., O.T. designed and
analyzed the study reported in SI.I; M.B., E.J.J., O.T. were particularly involved in writing the main
paper, with input from multiple co-authors.


Competing interests:     The authors declare no competing interests.




                                                 38
Data and materials availability:      Data are publicly available at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/LLM-Digital-Twin/Twin-2K-500-Mega-Study. The only piece of data which is
not publicly available is the Prolific ID of the participants. All code is publicly available at https:
//github.com/TianyiPeng/Twin-2K-500-Mega-Study.




                                                  39
                              Supporting Information
          Digital Twins are Funhouse Mirrors: Five Systematic Distortions




Contents
A Summary of Pre-Registered Comparisons Between Twins and Humans                                42

B Prompt Template                                                                               55
    B.1 Full Prompt Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
    B.2 Example of Survey Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
    B.3 Example of Format Templates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

C Details for Persona Construction                                                              58
    C.1 Full Persona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
    C.2 Persona Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
    C.3 Demographics Persona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
    C.4 Empty Persona . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67

D Distribution of Each Performance Metric Across Outcomes                                       68

E Digital Twin Performance Across Domains                                                       70

F Additional Partial Dependence Plots from XGBoost                                              76

G Comparison Across Implementation Methods                                                      77
    G.1 Persona summaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
    G.2 Alternative base LLMs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
    G.3 Alternative Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79

H Centaur Experiments                                                                           81

I   Survey of Expectations of Digital Twin vs. Human Behavior                                   83


                                                40
J   Detailed Information on Each Sub-Study                                                        86
    J.1   Accuracy Nudges for Misinformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
    J.2   Affective Primes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
    J.3   Consumer Minimalism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
    J.4   Context Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
    J.5   Default Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
    J.6   Digital Certificates for Luxury Consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
    J.7   Fees Accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
    J.8   Heterogeneous Story Beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
    J.9   Hiring Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
    J.10 Idea Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
    J.11 Infotainment News Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
    J.12 Measures of Creativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177
    J.13 Obedient Twins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
    J.14 Privacy Preferences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
    J.15 Preferences for Redistribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
    J.16 Promiscuous Donors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200
    J.17 Quantitative Intuition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210
    J.18 Targeting Fairness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218
    J.19 User Behavior with Recommendation Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219




                                                 41
A     Summary of Pre-Registered Comparisons Between Twins
      and Humans
(see SI section specific to each sub-study for details)

 Sub-study (Common Labels)        Pre-registered comparison(s)     Result(s)

 1. Accuracy Nudges for Mis- Is the effect of prompting people     When primed to consider accuracy
 information (social domain, to think about accuracy on sharing    or reminded of its importance, hu-
 cognitive domain, preference of untrustworthy (vs. trustworthy)   mans showed no statistically reli-
 measure, behavioral inten- news similar for twins compared to     able reduction in their willingness
 tion, social desirability, scale their human counterparts?        to share false versus true entertain-
 question, evaluating content)                                     ment headlines. In contrast, twins
                                                                   responded as the prior work would
                                                                   predict, demonstrating robust im-
                                                                   provements in truth discernment.




                                                  42
Sub-study (Common Labels)     Pre-registered comparison(s)            Result(s)

2. Affective Primes (social Research in the social sciences of-       (i) Yes. Writing about feeling
domain, scale question)       ten manipulates emotional states        grateful or out of control sig-
                              using affective priming, where par-     nificantly increased corresponding
                              ticipants are asked to reflect on a     feelings of gratitude and lack of
                              recent event. The broad question        control in digital twins, with these
                              here is whether affective priming       induced “affective states” subse-
                              works with digital twins. Specifi-      quently influencing downstream
                              cally:                                  outcomes.
                              (i) Do affective priming manipu-        (ii) No. Affective priming had
                              lations induce “states” in digital      stronger effects on digital twins’
                              twins (i.e., does writing about grat-   affective responses compared to
                              itude or lack of control momen-         humans for both gratitude and lack
                              tarily influence digital twins’ re-     of control manipulations.
                              sponses?)                               (iii) Yes. Valence affected twins’
                              (ii) Is the influence of affective      responses, but in a similar way to
                              priming similar for digital twins       humans: The gratitude prime had
                              and their human counterparts?           a stronger effect on the manipula-
                              (iii) Is the influence of affective     tion check than the lack of control
                              priming on digital twins dependent      prime for both humans and their
                              on the valence of affective prime       twins.
                              (i.e., between positive primes like     (iv) Yes. The semantic content
                              gratitude or negative primes like       written by each human was signif-
                              lack of control) or the proximal        icantly more similar to their twin’s
                              nature of the measures (i.e., does      content than a randomly selected
                              it “spill over” to other, related di-   twin’s content.
                              mensions or only influence proxi-
                              mal dimensions)?
                              (iv) Is there a relationship between
                              what digital twins and their human
                                            43 in their response
                              counterparts say
                              to the manipulation?
Sub-study (Common Labels)            Pre-registered comparison(s)        Result(s)

3. Consumer Minimalism How does the predictive validity of               The predictive validity of the Con-
(social domain, cognitive do- the Consumer Minimalism Scale              sumer Minimalism Scale docu-
main, preference measure, vary in a sample of human vs. their            mented in human samples repli-
personality measure, scale digital twins? The prediction is that         cated robustly in the twin sample.
question)                            respondents scoring high on the     The scale predicted consumers’
                                     minimalism scale will prefer min-   preferences for minimalist versus
                                     imalist home environments more.     non-minimalist apartment interi-
                                                                         ors.

4. Context Effects (cognitive Can digital twins demonstrate the          Humans replicated the attraction
domain, replicates known hu- attraction effect (33) and the com-         effect, but twins did not. Neither
man bias, preference mea- promise effect (34)?                           humans nor digital twins exhibited
sure, test of rationality, differ-                                       a compromise effect.
ent versions of question, be-
havioral intention)

5. Defaults Effects (cogni- Can digital twins demonstrate de-            Human participants showed a de-
tive domain, replicates known fault effects (32, 35)?                    fault effect in a green energy adop-
human bias, preference mea-                                              tion paradigm but not in an or-
sure, test of rationality, pro-                                          gan donation paradigm. Twins pre-
social, different versions of                                            dicted a strong default effect in the
question, behavioral inten-                                              organ donation paradigm but no ef-
tion, social desirability)                                               fect in the green energy paradigm.




                                                   44
Sub-study (Common Labels)      Pre-registered comparison(s)          Result(s)

6. Digital Certifications for How does the propensity to hold        Digital certification via a digi-
Luxury Consumption (social higher status perceptions for a lux-      tal passport increased the value
domain, different versions ury product associated with, vs. not      perception of a diffused luxury
of question, attitude, scale associated with, a digital certifica-   product for humans. Digital twins’
question, human-tech interac- tion, differ between twins and their   value perceptions, however, were
tions)                         human counterparts?                   not impacted by the inclusion of a
                                                                     digital passport.




                                              45
Sub-study (Common Labels)     Pre-registered comparison(s)           Result(s)

7. Fees Accuracy (social do- (i) How does the knowledge of dig-      (i) Twins were much more accurate
main, preference measure, ital twins regarding fees and sur-         than humans on knowledge ques-
different versions of question, charges in the marketplace com-      tions.
attitude, scale question)     pare to that of their human coun-      (ii) Twins closely mirrored the av-
                              terparts?                              erage human response on fairness
                              (ii) How do perceptions of fair-       questions.
                              ness regarding fees and surcharges     (iii) Twins exhibited narrower vari-
                              in the marketplace compare be-         ance than humans on fairness per-
                              tween digital twins and their hu-      ceptions.
                              man counterparts?                      (iv) Twins were on average more
                              (iii) How does the variation in per-   favorable to government regulation
                              ceptions of fairness regarding fees    compared to humans.
                              and surcharges in the marketplace      (v) For both groups, conservatism
                              compare between digital twins and      was correlated with less sup-
                              their human counterparts?              port for pricing regulation. How-
                              (iv) How do beliefs about gov-         ever, twins stereotyped partici-
                              ernment regulation regarding fees      pants based on their political ideol-
                              and surcharges in the marketplace      ogy, with exaggerated support for
                              compare between digital twins and      regulation for liberal participants.
                              their human counterparts?
                              (v) How does the variation in
                              beliefs about government regula-
                              tion regarding fees and surcharges
                              in the marketplace compare be-
                              tween digital twins and their hu-
                              man counterparts?




                                             46
Sub-study (Common Labels)      Pre-registered comparison(s)           Result(s)

8. Heterogeneous Story Be- When reading a book and pre-               We found significant positive cor-
liefs (content evaluation, dif- dicting the emotion (valence and      relations for both valence and
ferent versions of question, arousal) of the next chapter based       arousal.
scale question)                on the previous chapter, what is the
                               correlation between the expected
                               valence and expected arousal from
                               humans vs. their digital twins?

9. Hiring algorithms (social Can digital twins predict job candi-     (i) Twins tended to express views
domain, preference measure, date preferences for workplace hir-       that were overall more pro-social
human-tech interactions, dif- ing policies? Specifically:             (sustainability, ESG, work-life bal-
ferent versions of question, (i) Can digital twins predict work-      ance, transparent leadership, cul-
scale question)                place preferences?                     ture and values), and less ”career-
                               (ii) Can experimenting on a popu-      oriented” (firm prestige, career de-
                               lation of digital twins recover the    velopment) than those expressed
                               true average treatment effects as      by humans.
                               experimenting on a human popu-         (ii) Twins were overall less averse
                               lation?                                to hiring algorithms compared to
                                                                      humans.




                                              47
Sub-study (Common Labels)      Pre-registered comparison(s)         Result(s)

10. Idea Evaluation (cog- (i) How do digital twins’ ratings of      (i) Creativity ratings coming from
nitive   domain,   preference idea creativity compare to those of   twins were not significantly corre-
measure, evaluating content, their human counterparts?              lated with the ratings coming from
pro-social, different versions (ii) Do digital twins show human     their human counterparts.
of question, valenced, scale favoritism, AI favoritism, or nei-     (ii) When no information was pro-
question)                      ther when evaluating ideas?          vided about the source of the ideas,
                                                                    humans rated twin ideas higher
                                                                    (more creative) than human ideas,
                                                                    and twins rated human ideas higher
                                                                    than twin ideas. When information
                                                                    was provided about the source of
                                                                    ideas, humans displayed AI aver-
                                                                    sion, and twins displayed human
                                                                    aversion.




                                             48
Sub-study (Common Labels)      Pre-registered comparison(s)          Result(s)

11. Infotainment News Shar- When choosing an article to share        While humans and twins both pri-
ing (social domain, cogni- on social media, will digital twins       oritized headline, this considera-
tive domain, preference mea- prioritize the following attributes     tion mattered much less to twins,
sure, content evaluation, be- similarly to their human counter-      who equally relied on number of
havioral intention, social de- part:                                 likes and put far more weight on
sirability, scale question)    1. Headline (more vs. less enter-     political lean than their human
                               taining)                              counterparts. Twins were also sen-
                               2. Source (more vs. less trustwor-    sitive to source trustworthiness,
                               thy)                                  while humans did not differentiate
                               3. Content type (entertaining vs.     between more or less trustworthy
                               informative)                          sources.
                               4. Political lean (conservative vs.
                               liberal)
                               5. Number of likes (20 vs. 200 vs.
                               2,000)

12. Measures of Creativ- (i) How do digital twins’ creative          (i) The ideas generated by twins
ity (cognitive domain, pro- abilities compare to those of their      were judged as more creative (and
social)                        human counterparts?                   with less dispersion in creativity
                               (ii) Can digital twins replicate      ratings) than the ideas generated by
                               the correlations between creativ-     their human counterparts. Digital
                               ity tests and idea generation per-    twins also performed better (and
                               formance observed in humans?          with less dispersion) at the DAT, a
                                                                     creativity task.
                                                                     (ii) The correlation previously
                                                                     found between DAT and creativ-
                                                                     ity was replicated, both among hu-
                                                                     mans and twins.



                                              49
Sub-study (Common Labels)     Pre-registered comparison(s)           Result(s)

13. Obedient Twins (social LLMs are trained to be obedient           (i) No. Twins were less sensitive
domain, preference measure, and deferential. Does this tendency      to considering a different point of
valenced, scale question)     make digital twins more sensitive      view compared to humans.
                              to survey instructions than their      (ii) No. Twins were less sensitive
                              human counterparts?                    overall to these scenario manipu-
                              We tested this in three tasks:         lations compared to humans.
                              (i) Self-persuasion (36). When         (iii) No. Humans were more sensi-
                              prompted to consider the other         tive to the instructions to forecast
                              side, do digital twins abandon their   feelings in absurd scenarios.
                              attitudes more readily than their
                              human counterparts?
                              (ii) Scenarios. Do digital twins
                              more “obediently” follow the in-
                              structions to imagine themselves
                              in different scenarios, leading to
                              more sensitivity to scenario ma-
                              nipulations?
                              (iii) Absurd Scenarios. Do digi-
                              tal twins “earnestly” respond to
                              instructions that would be non-
                              sensical to their human counter-
                              parts?




                                             50
Sub-study (Common Labels)       Pre-registered comparison(s)        Result(s)

14. Privacy Preferences of How do humans and their digi-            Twins perceived their privacy to
Digital Twins (social domain, tal twins vary in their perceptions   be violated less than their hu-
preference measure, human- of privacy violations for different      man counterparts. We found al-
tech interactions, conflict- data processing and targeting prac-    most no correlation in preferences
related, different versions of tices in online advertising?         for individual-level privacy viola-
question, scale question)                                           tion scores for twins compared to
                                                                    humans. However, in aggregate,
                                                                    humans and their twins ranked pri-
                                                                    vacy violations similarly across ad-
                                                                    vertising practices that rely dif-
                                                                    ferently on tracking and targeting
                                                                    (high rank correlation).




                                              51
Sub-study (Common Labels)         Pre-registered comparison(s)           Result(s)

15. Preferences for Redistri- Can digital twins predict pref-            Twins showed more extreme re-
bution (social domain, atti- erences for redistribution and              distribution preferences. On aver-
tude, scale question)             other outcomes like trust, socio-      age, they were more likely to think
                                  economic background, and beliefs       ”people should take care of them-
                                  on fairness and social mobility?       selves” but more willing to pay
                                                                         taxes to improve healthcare for all
                                                                         people. They were more likely to
                                                                         think people are fair and that peo-
                                                                         ple can be trusted. They were also
                                                                         more likely to think that hard work
                                                                         and luck are equally important for
                                                                         success. Finally, they showed very
                                                                         little distribution in their fathers’
                                                                         educational attainment, with al-
                                                                         most 100% of them reporting their
                                                                         father only completed high school.

16.   Promiscuous        Donors How do humans and twins differ in        Human       respondents    penalized
(social domain, preference their reaction to (i) others who do           promiscuous donors, especially
measure, political domain, not donate to either party, (ii) oth-         when the behavior appeared mo-
conflict-related,         social ers who donate to both parties, (iii)   tivated by self-interest (e.g., culti-
cognition,   attitude,    social justification from those who do-        vating access or recruiting talent).
desirability, different versions nate to both parties based on prag-     In contrast, twins were less puni-
of question, valenced, scale matic vs. value-based reasons?              tive (sometimes even favorable) to-
question)                                                                ward the very same targets.




                                                 52
Sub-study (Common Labels)           Pre-registered comparison(s)          Result(s)

17.   Quantitative     Intuition What is the relationship between         We found a moderate correlation
(cognitive    domain,      scale Quantitative Intuition (QI) mea-         between human responses to the
question)                           sures and demographics, person-       individual QI scale and those of
                                    ality traits, and individual mea-     their twins, and a weaker relation-
                                    sures like overconfidence and nu-     ship in assessments of the QI score
                                    meracy? Can digital twins capture     of the organization they work(ed)
                                    Quantitative Intuition (QI) skills?   for. Twins failed to mimic re-
                                                                          sponses to two QI behavior ques-
                                                                          tions. Twins tended to select the
                                                                          normative, high-QI behavior much
                                                                          more frequently than humans did.

18. Targeting Fairness Per- How do humans and twins per-                  At the aggregate level, the twins
ceptions (social domain, pref- ceive the fairness of demographic-         closely matched human judgments
erence measure, social cogni- based versus broad targeting?               of the perceived fairness of demo-
tion, attitude, valenced, differ-                                         graphic targeting, replicating the
ent versions of question, scale                                           finding that it is viewed as less fair
question)                                                                 than broad targeting and produc-
                                                                          ing similar average ratings across
                                                                          conditions.




                                                   53
Sub-study (Common Labels)        Pre-registered comparison(s)           Result(s)

19.   User   Behavior      with (i) How do self-reported average        (i) Twins under-reported platform
Recommendation          Algo- time spent on the platform dif-           usage.
rithms (cognitive domain, fer across humans and their digital           (ii) Twins were more aware of how
human-tech interactions)         twin counterparts?                     recommendation algorithms work.
                                 (ii) How does knowledge that rec-      (iii) Twins were more likely to
                                 ommendation algorithms depend          strategize.
                                 on the user’s past behavior com-       (iv) Twins preferred more control
                                 pare between humans and their          over algorithms.
                                 digital twin counterparts?
                                 (iii) How does the prevalence of
                                 strategization (modifying your be-
                                 havior to influence future recom-
                                 mendations) compare between hu-
                                 mans and their digital twin coun-
                                 terparts?
                                 (iv) How does the preference for
                                 user controls over recommended
                                 content compare between humans
                                 and their digital twin counterparts?

                    Table 1: Pre-Registered Comparisons and Results. We la-
                    bel individual outcomes rather than substudies for our meta-
                    analysis. This table provides, for each substudy, the labels
                    associated with at least half of the outcomes from that sub-
                    study.




                                                54
B     Prompt Template

B.1   Full Prompt Template

You are an AI assistant. Your task is to answer the ’New Survey Question’ as
if you are the person described in the ’Persona Profile’ (which consists
of their past survey responses).


Remain consistent with the persona’s previous answers and stated traits.
Simulate their responses to new questions while accounting for human cognitive
limitations, uncertainty, and biases.


Follow all instructions provided for the new question carefully regarding
the format of your answer.


Persona Profile (This individual’s past survey responses):
{Persona Profile}


New Survey Question & Instructions
(Please respond as the persona described above):
{Survey Questions}


Format Instructions:
In order to facilitate the postprocessing, you should generate a JSON object
by filling in Masks with the appropriate values in the following template
for {N} questions, where each question Q1, Q2, ... corresponds to the question
Q1, Q2, ... above.
{Format Templates}




                                     55
B.2   Example of Survey Questions

Q1:
Introduction: You are being invited to participate in a research study...
By selecting the ‘Agree’ option below I am agreeing to participate,
I have not given up any of the legal rights that I would have if I were not
a participant in the study.
Question Type: Single Choice
Options:
  1 - Agree
  2 - Disagree
Answer: [Masked]


Q2:
How important is it to you that your employer actively invests in environmental
sustainability (e.g., reducing carbon emissions, minimizing waste)?
Question Type: Single Choice
Options:
  1 - Not at all important
  2 - Slightly important
  3 - Moderately important
  4 - Very important
  5 - Extremely important
Answer: [Masked]


Q3:
Would you prefer to work at a company that is outspoken about social and
political issues, or one that remains neutral?
Question Type: Single Choice
Options:



                                    56
    1 - Strongly prefer outspoken
    2 - Somewhat prefer outspoken
    3 - No preference
    4 - Somewhat prefer neutral
    5 - Strongly prefer neutral
Answer: [Masked]
......


B.3     Example of Format Templates

{
       "Q1": {
            "Question Type": "Single Choice",
            "Answers": {
            "SelectedByPosition": Masked,
            // a number from 1 to 2, corresponding to the option position
            "SelectedText": "Masked"
            // a string, corresponding to the option text
            }
       },
       "Q2": {
            "Question Type": "Single Choice",
            "Answers": {
            "SelectedByPosition": Masked,
            // a number from 1 to 5, corresponding to the option position
            "SelectedText": "Masked"
            // a string, corresponding to the option text
            }
       },
....



                                        57
C     Details for Persona Construction
In this section, we detail the construction of the various types of personas. That is, we provide the
text that is inserted into the full prompt template (Section B.1), as {Persona Profile}.


C.1    Full Persona

Our full persona is built from the text-based questions and answers in Twin-2K-500, reflecting
natural language interactions. The Twin-2K-500 dataset consists of four waves, with wave 4 repeat-
ing questions from waves 1–3 for test–retest purposes. For persona construction, when a question
appears in both waves 1–3 and wave 4, we use the wave 4 responses. The complete persona dataset
can be accessed at https://huggingface.co/datasets/LLM-Digital-Twin/Twin-2K-500, specifically
the ‘persona text’ split within the ‘full persona’ subset. An example of (portions of) a full persona
is below:

Which part of the United States do you currently live in?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - Northeast (PA, NY, NJ, RI, CT, MA, VT, NH, ME)


2 - Midwest (ND, SD, NE, KS, MN, IA, MO, WI, IL, MI, IN, OH)


3 - South (TX, OK, AR, LA, KY, TN, MS, AL, WV, DC, MD, DE, VA, NC, SC,
GA, FL)


4 - West (WA, OR, ID, MT, WY, CA, NV, UT, CO, AZ, NM)


5 - Pacific (HI, AK)



                                                 58
Answer: 2 - Midwest (ND, SD, NE, KS, MN, IA, MO, WI, IL, MI, IN, OH)


What is the sex that you were assigned at birth?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - Male


2 - Female


Answer: 2 - Female


...


Here are a number of characteristics that may or may not apply to you.
Please indicate next to each statement the extent to which you agree or
disagree with that statement. I see myself as someone who...


Question Type: Matrix


Options:


1 = Disagree strongly


2 = Disagree a little


3 = Neither agree nor disagree



                                    59
4 = Agree a little


5 = Agree strongly


1. Is talkative


Answer: 1 - Disagree strongly


2. Tends to find fault with others


Answer: 1 - Disagree strongly


3. Does a thorough job


Answer: 5 - Agree strongly


4. Is depressed, blue


Answer: 1 - Disagree strongly


5. Is original, comes up with new ideas


Answer: 4 - Agree a little


6. Is reserved


Answer: 4 - Agree a little


...



                                     60
Please consider the following product category: Detergents - Heavy Duty
- Liquid. Suppose you are in a grocery store, and you see the following
product in that category: Purex Liquid Laundry Detergent Plus OXI, Stain
Defense Technology, 128 Fluid Ounces, 85 Wash Loads. The product is
priced at: \$5.98. Would you or would you not purchase this product?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - Yes, I would purchase the product


2 - No, I would not purchase the product


Answer: 1 - Yes, I would purchase the product




C.2    Persona Summary

Each twin in the full persona dataset averages about 30K tokens, making its simulation relatively
slow and costly. To address this, we developed a shorter and more concise version called persona
summary. In this version, we simplify the questions and record responses using distributional
information across participants. For instance, instead of including the full set of Big Five questions,
we represent the trait with a single value such as “score extraversion = 2.125 (26th percentile).”
   For simplification, wave 4 questions (which involved treatment-condition randomization) are
excluded from the persona summary. As a result, the persona summary prompt is about 3K tokens
in length—a substantial reduction compared to the full persona. Our results show that persona
summary can serve as an efficient alternative when token and time budgets are constrained.
   The complete persona dataset can be accessed at https://huggingface.co/datasets/LLM-Digital-
Twin/Twin-2K-500, specifically the ‘persona summary’ split within the ‘full persona’ subset. An



                                                  61
example of (portions of) persona summary is below:

The person’s demographics are the following...


Geographic region: Midwest (ND, SD, NE, KS, MN, IA, MO, WI, IL, MI, IN,
OH)


Gender: Female


Age: 30-49


Education level: Some college, no degree


Race: Black


Citizen of the US: Yes


Marital status: Married


Religion: Nothing in particular


Religious attendance: A few times a year


Political affiliation: Independent


Income: $50,000-$75,000


Political views: Moderate


Household size: 3



                                             62
Employment status: Part-time employment


The person’s Big 5 scores are the following:


score_extraversion = 2.125 (26th percentile)


score_agreeableness = 4.556 (84th percentile)


wave1_score_conscientiousness = 4.556 (77th percentile)


score_openness = 3.5 (36th percentile)


score_neuroticism = 1.5 (15th percentile)


Openness reflects curiosity and receptiveness to new experiences,
Conscientiousness indicates self-discipline and goal-directed behavior,
Extraversion measures sociability and assertiveness, Agreeableness
reflects compassion and cooperativeness, and Neuroticism captures
emotional instability and susceptibility to negative emotions. Each
score ranges from 1 to 5, and a higher score indicates a greater display
of the associated traits.


...


C.3    Demographics Persona

We also construct a demographics persona, which contains only demographic information. This
version is derived by truncating the full persona to retain only 14 demographic variables: region,
sex, age, education, race, citizenship, marital status, religion, religious attendance, political party,
household income, political ideology, household size, and employment status. By design, the



                                                  63
demographics persona always serves as a prefix of the full persona. An example is shown below:

Which part of the United States do you currently live in?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - Northeast (PA, NY, NJ, RI, CT, MA, VT, NH, ME)


2 - Midwest (ND, SD, NE, KS, MN, IA, MO, WI, IL, MI, IN, OH)


3 - South (TX, OK, AR, LA, KY, TN, MS, AL, WV, DC, MD, DE, VA, NC, SC,
GA, FL)


4 - West (WA, OR, ID, MT, WY, CA, NV, UT, CO, AZ, NM)


5 - Pacific (HI, AK)


Answer: 2 - Midwest (ND, SD, NE, KS, MN, IA, MO, WI, IL, MI, IN, OH)


What is the sex that you were assigned at birth?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - Male


2 - Female



                                              64
Answer: 2 - Female


How old are you?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - 18-29


2 - 30-49


3 - 50-64


4 - 65+


Answer: 2 - 30-49


What is the highest level of schooling or degree that you have
completed?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - Less than high school


2 - High school graduate


3 - Some college, no degree


                                    65
4 - Associate’s degree


5 - College graduate/some postgrad


6 - Postgraduate


Answer: 3 - Some college, no degree


What is your race or origin?


Question Type: Single Choice


Options:


1 - White


2 - Black


3 - Asian


4 - Hispanic


5 - Other


Answer: 2 -- Black



We integrate the constructed personas into the prompt template (see Methods section) to perform
our LLM simulations.


                                              66
C.4    Empty Persona

The Empty Persona specification does not provide any individual-level information in the prompts.
Instead, {Persona Profile} is replaced with the placeholder [Empty Persona Profile].
   Specifically, the prompt used for all individuals is:

...
Persona Profile (This individual’s past survey responses):
[Empty Persona Profile]
...




                                                 67
D    Distribution of Each Performance Metric Across Outcomes




 Figure 7: Distribution Across Outcomes of Correlation Between Human and Twin Responses.




Figure 8: Distribution Across Outcomes of Individual-Level Accuracy Between Human and Twin
Responses.




                                           68
Figure 9: Distribution Across Outcomes of —Glass’s Δ— Between Human and Twin Responses.




Figure 10: Distribution Across Outcomes of Ratio of Standard Deviation Between Human and
Twin Responses.




                                          69
E    Digital Twin Performance Across Domains
The categorical labels in our meta-analysis are not mutually exclusive; an outcome may be tagged
with multiple labels. All labels are binary, except sample size. The labels are as follows (with
examples from our data):

    • Social

        – Social domain (104 outcomes): involves social topics (e.g., likelihood of sharing news
           content with others)

        – Conflict-related (15 outcomes): involves intra- or inter-personal conflict (e.g., confidence
           in ability to manage conflict)

        – Pro-social (36 outcomes): involves pro-social topics such as altruism or cooperation
           (e.g., paying higher taxes to improve healthcare for all people)

        – Social cognition (15 outcomes): involves social cognition such as asking the participant
           to judge the behavior of others (e.g., judging someone who donates to both political
           parties)

        – Personality measure (6 outcomes): assesses personality traits (e.g., consumer minimal-
           ism)

        – Social desirability (55 outcomes): has a socially desirable answer (e.g., willingness to
           be an organ donor)

    • Preferences/attitudes

        – Attitude (33 outcomes): captures general attitudes toward a topic, issue, or person (e.g.,
           whether most people can be trusted)

        – Political domain (12 outcomes): focuses on political content (e.g., whether pricing
           practices should be regulated by the government)

        – Preference measure (123 outcomes): measures the participant’s preferences (e.g., pref-
           erence between two room environments)



                                                 70
        – Behavioral intention (44 outcomes): captures future behavioral intentions (e.g., intention
           to apply for a job)

   • Cognitive skills/rationality

        – Cognitive domain (79 outcomes): captures or assesses cognition (e.g., strategic content
           consumption on media platforms)

        – Test of rationality (10 outcomes): assesses rational decision-making (e.g., sensitivity to
           context effects)

   • Content evaluation

        – Evaluating content (62 outcomes): requires evaluation of stimuli (e.g., predicting content
           of next book chapter)

        – Valenced (40 outcomes): involves positive versus negative judgments (e.g., judging the
           creativity of ideas)

   • Human–tech interactions

        – Human–tech interactions (45 outcomes): concerns human interaction with technology
           (e.g., hiring algorithms)

   • Mechanical

        – Replicates known human bias (5 outcomes): whether the outcome replicates a well-
           known human bias (e.g., default effect)

        – Different versions of question(s) (82 outcomes): question(s) wording varies across
           participants (e.g., across different conditions of an experiment)

        – Scale question (142 outcomes): uses Likert or similar rating scales (e.g., agreement
           with a statement)

        – Sample size (continuous): the number of participants on which the outcome is measured

   We estimate a mixed linear model, including random intercepts for each sub-study. See Figure 11
for the results using correlation as the DV, and Figures 12-14 for the results using the other
performance metrics as DVs.

                                                71
Figure 11: Results from Meta-Analysis (Mixed Linear Model with z-transformed Correlation as
Dependent Variable). Regression coefficients with 95% confidence intervals. The average correla-
tion across all outcomes is 0.197. Correlation between responses from twins versus their human
counterparts tends to be higher in social domains, except when social desirability is salient. Cor-
relation tends to be higher in the cognitive domain and in domains related to human-technology
interactions, but lower in the political domain and when providing valenced evaluations.
                                                 72
Figure 12: Results from Meta-Analysis (Mixed Linear Model with Individual-Level Accuracy as
Dependent Variable).




                                            73
Figure 13: Results from Meta-Analysis (Mixed Linear Model with —Glass’s Δ— as Dependent
Variable).




                                          74
Figure 14: Results from Meta-Analysis (Mixed Linear Model with std(twin) / std(human) as
Dependent Variable).




                                          75
F   Additional Partial Dependence Plots from XGBoost




             Figure 15: Partial Dependence Plots from XGBoost.




                                    76
G     Comparison Across Implementation Methods

G.1     Persona summaries

We add as a benchmark an alternative way to construct digital twins, labeled “persona summary:” a
concise, statement-based summary (approximately 13K characters) of the questions and responses
with distributional information (e.g., Big 5 personality scores with percentile ranks rather than 44
detailed questions and answers on which the scores are based). Results are reported in Figure 16.
We see that this version performs very similarly to the full persona, offering a viable lower-cost
alternative.




Figure 16: Gains from Leveraging Individual-Level Data, Including Persona Summary as Bench-
mark. *: best performing benchmark, or not significantly different from best at p<0.05 (not applica-
ble to ratio of standard deviations), after applying Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons
in each column.


G.2     Alternative base LLMs

We test GPT-5, Deepseek (deepseek-r1-0528), Gemini (gemini-2.5-flash, gemini-3-pro), and a fine-
tuned GPT-4.1 as alternative base models. Full persona prompts were used by all benchmarks. The

                                                77
temperature for GPT-4.1 and its fine-tuned variants was set to the default value of 0.7. For the other
models we selected the temperature that was expected to yield the best performance. We used a
temperature of 0 for DeepSeek (deepseek-r1) and Gemini-2.5 (gemini-2.5-flash) because we found
this helped GPT4.1. We used the default temperature of 1 for Gemini-3-pro, as Google recommends
not changing the temperature of this model for better performance. We set the temperature for GPT-
5 at 1 due to the API restriction. All other API parameters for these benchmarks were kept at their
default values.
   The fine-tuned model was fine-tuned using the Twin-2K-500 dataset. Our approach consisted
in using a conservative fine-tuning model that would (i) not use any information from our sub-
studies and (ii) rely on treating all components of the twins as a unitary construct. That is, if a twin
demonstrates consistency in reporting demographic characteristics, it should also display coherence
when answering questions in other domains (e.g., attitudes, preferences, or behaviors). As such, for
each participant, we created a training example consisting of:

   1. A system instruction guiding the model to answer survey questions consistently with the
      individual’s prior responses and realistic cognitive constraints,

   2. A user message containing the Twin 2K-500 questions with all “Answer: [Masked]” at once,

   3. An assistant message containing the same message as the user’s but with the answers revealed.

   This structure replicates the prompting approach we used for the mega-study. It required the
model to infer the missing responses from contextual information while maintaining alignment
with the participant’s traits. Fine-tuning was performed on GPT-4.1 (release date 2025-04-14) using
supervised learning with automatically selected hyperparameters. The fine-tuning was ultimately
processed using 3 epochs, a batch size of 4 and a learning rate multiplier of 2. All sub-studies
were conducted strictly out-of-sample, ensuring that no outcome measures used for evaluation
overlapped with the fine-tuning training data. Note that the fine-tuned model required us to pre-
process the input slightly to remove some whitespaces (given the token limit in fine-tuning which
was set to 65,536 tokens) and to modify our prompting strategy when running the simulations
on the sub-studies. Indeed, after fine-tuning, the model was no longer as proficient at following
instructions and responses tended to have different formats. The prompts were modified to ensure
the consistency in format.

                                                  78
   Results are presented in Figure 17. We see that no other base model significantly outperforms
GPT-4.1.




Figure 17: Alternative Base LLMs (Combined with Full Persona). *: best performing benchmark,
or not significantly different from best at p<0.05 (not applicable to ratio of standard deviations),
after applying Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons in each column.


G.3    Alternative Temperature

We replicate the main comparison in the paper (i.e., with GPT-4.1) with a temperature of 0 instead
of the default temperature. Figure 18 displays the results, including the full persona with default
temperature as baseline. We see that when temperature is 0, like when temperature is set to
default, digital twins based on full personas perform significantly better than generic twins based
on demographics on correlation, and not significantly differently on individual-level accuracy. We
also see that performance is overall improved when temperature=0.




                                                79
Figure 18: Gains from Leveraging Individual-Level Data (Temperature=0). *: best performing
benchmark, or not significantly different from best at p<0.05 (not applicable to ratio of standard
deviations), after applying Bonferroni correcting for multiple comparisons in each column.




                                               80
H     Centaur Experiments
The state-of-the-art LLMs we used as based models are general-purpose models (e.g., GPT-4.1). A
natural question arises: what if an LLM fine-tuned specifically for human behavioral prediction was
used as base model for the creation of digital twins? One such potential base model is Centaur (22),
a 70B-parameter model fine-tuned from Llama-3.1-70B using data from over 60,000 participants,
encompassing 10 million choices across 160 behavioral experiments.
    We use the Centaur model marcelbinz/Llama-3.1-Centaur-70B from Hugging Face with
BF16 precision. We evaluate Centaur’s performance on our 19 studies using the same setup as other
LLMs, with one adjustment: we append ### Output \n ‘‘‘json to the end of each prompt
instruction to encourage JSON-formatted outputs. After experimenting with several formatting
strategies, we found this approach to yield the most consistent results.
    In order to disentangle the impact of leveraging individual-level information from a panel of
participants vs. using an LLM fine-tuned on a large cross-sectional dataset as a base model, we
follow a 2 (Lllama vs. Centaur) x 2 (empty persona vs. persona summary) experimental design and
test the following configurations:

    • Centaur Persona Summary: Centaur model prompted with Persona Summary instructions.

    • Centaur Empty Persona: Centaur model prompted with Empty Persona instructions (no
      persona information).

    • Llama Persona Summary: Base Llama-3.1-70B model prompted with Persona Summary
      instructions.

    • Llama Empty Persona: Base Llama-3.1-70B model prompted with Empty Persona instruc-
      tions.

    We use the Persona Summary instead of the Full Persona to avoid context-length issues that
degrade Centaur’s performance. Temperature is set to 0 for all models.




                                                 81
Figure 19: Performance Comparison for Centaur and Llama Models Under Different Persona
Configurations. *: best performing benchmark, or not significantly different from best at p<0.05
(not applicable to ratio of standard deviations), after applying Bonferroni correcting for multiple
comparisons in each column.


   Figure 19 displays the results, including GPT-4.1 (persona summary) as a reference. We sepa-
rately discuss results related to the choice of base model vs. the use of individual-leevel information.
   Base model: Centaur vs. Llama vs. GPT-4.1. Centaur outperforms its base model, Llama-
3.1-70B, in terms of accuracy. However, the performance of digital twins based on the Centaur
base model remains below that of state-of-the-art closed-source models such as GPT-4.1. Several
factors may explain this gap:

   1. Prompt formatting: Centaur was trained to answer single questions, whereas our evaluation
      involves multi-question inputs.

   2. Out-of-distribution testing: Our 19 studies include scenarios that may differ significantly
      from Centaur’s training data.

   3. Limited persona adaptation: Centaur was not trained to explicitly utilize persona informa-
      tion, which may limit its ability to model human heterogeneity.

                                                  82
Addressing these issues could further improve Centaur’s behavioral modeling capability—we leave
them for future work.
     Individual-level information: persona summary vs. empty persona. Despite lower overall
accuracy, both Llama and Centaur exhibit improved correlations when persona information is
included. This suggests that providing even summarized persona data helps models better capture
individual-level heterogeneity, reinforcing the importance of collecting richer personal context in
behavioral prediction tasks.



I      Survey of Expectations of Digital Twin vs. Human Behavior
To assess expectations of human and digital twin responses, we asked respondents to estimate the
average treatment effect from five experiments (tasks) in our data, chosen a priori to capture distinct
paradigms (default effects, affective priming, targeting fairness, perceived privacy violation, and
idea evaluation).13 We recruited 104 respondents from LinkedIn and the Society for Judgment and
Decision-Making (SJDM) listserv; 36 were excluded following preregistered criteria (completion
times <1/3 or >3x the median, repetitive slider responses, or excessive minimum/maximum re-
sponses), leaving 68 in the final sample, including 27 academics, 15 managers (mid-level to C-suite)
and 20 students.
     For each task, respondents were given a brief description and shown human and twin mean
values from the original survey in the control condition, then asked to predict the mean in a
treatment condition (opt-out vs. opt-in defaults for green energy, gratitude ratings after a neutral
vs. gratitude-writing prompt, fairness ratings for non-targeted vs. targeted ad campaigns, privacy
ratings for no ads/tracking vs. personalized ads with cross-site tracking, and creativity ratings of
human- vs. AI-generated app ideas).
     As shown in Figure 20, predicted treatment effects were consistently more accurate for humans
than for digital twins. In all five tasks, the observed average treatment effect among humans fell
within the 95% confidence intervals of the predicted average treatment effect. By contrast, the
confidence interval did not include the observed mean for three of the five digital twin predictions.
    13 Pre-registered as https://aspredicted.org/65ty-73sp.pdf.




                                                            83
Figure 20: Predicted Average Treatment Effects for Humans and Digital Twins across Five Tasks.
Black dots and error bars represent the mean predicted average treatment effects and 95% confidence
intervals. White squares represent the mean treatment effect actually observed in the sample.


   To formally test the difference between human and digital twin prediction accuracy, we estimated
a linear mixed-effects model:

                  𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑡 + 𝛽2𝑇 𝑎𝑠𝑘 𝑖𝑡 + (1|𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑑𝑖 ) + 𝜖𝑖𝑡

where 𝑒𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑡 is the prediction error for respondent 𝑖 on task 𝑡 (abs(predicted value in treatment con-
dition - observed value in treatment condition)/(observed value in treatment condition)), 𝐻𝑢𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑖𝑡
indicates predictions for human vs. digital twins, 𝑇 𝑎𝑠𝑘 𝑖𝑡 indexes the five tasks, (1|𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑒𝐼𝑑𝑖 )
is a random intercept for each respondent, and 𝜖𝑖𝑡 is the residual. Results confirmed significantly
lower errors for predictions of human responses on average (𝛽 = -0.072, SE = 0.011, p < 0.001)
(see Table 2).

                                                 84
       Effect                           Estimate   Std. Error   t value       Pr(> |𝑡|)

       (Intercept)                        0.4093     0.01482     27.62    5.552 × 10−82
       Human                            -0.07244     0.01052    -6.887    9.784 × 10−12
       taskaffPrime                      -0.2555     0.01619    -15.78    1.413 × 10−50
       tasktargFair                      -0.1645     0.01642    -10.02    1.222 × 10−22
       taskPPV                           -0.1135     0.01666    -6.811    1.611 × 10−11
       taskideaEval                      -0.1620     0.01676    -9.667    2.939 × 10−21

       Random Effects and Model Summary
       𝜎2                                                                          0.03
       𝜏00                                                                         0.00
       ICC                                                                         0.11
       N (ResponseId)                                                               61
       Observations                                                               1118
       Marginal 𝑅 2 / Conditional 𝑅 2                                     0.200 / 0.291

Table 2: Linear Mixed-Effects Regression of Respondent Prediction Errors across Prediction
Targets and Tasks.




                                              85
J       Detailed Information on Each Sub-Study
All the studies were conducted on Prolific with human participants. Each study was subsequently
run on their corresponding digital twins. Respondents and their twins were always assigned to the
same condition(s) ensuring a fair 1-to-1 comparison.


J.1     Accuracy Nudges for Misinformation

J.1.1    Main Questions/Hypotheses

The spread of misinformation across social media is a growing public policy concern, with severe
implications for health, politics, and science. Recent work suggests that people care about being
accurate but share misinformation because the social media context focuses their attention on
other factors (37). The proposed solution for inattention-based misinformation sharing is to prime
accuracy before the decision to share information. Research testing this account (38) demonstrates
that asking people to rate the accuracy of unrelated headlines or state the extent to which they
agree that it is important to share accurate content on social media before sharing improves truth
discernment: that is, reduces sharing of false headlines compared to true headlines. The current
study aims to replicate this pattern with human participants, and test whether their digital twins
respond similarly to these accuracy nudges.
    Specifically, this study aims to replicate study 5 of (38), using a different set of headlines.
While (38) demonstrate the effectiveness of accuracy nudges in the context of political news
headlines, the current study utilizes their paradigm to test the effectiveness of accuracy nudges
in the context of non-political entertainment news headlines. The decision to sharing entertaining
news may provoke consideration of how entertaining the headline is, beyond considerations on the
accuracy of the news and trustworthiness of the sources (39). Indeed, people generally prefer and
are most likely to engage with entertaining news (40,41,42) and interesting or emotionally arousing
word-of-mouth (43, 44, 45). Testing the effectiveness of accuracy nudges for entertaining headlines
is therefore an important extension of the prior work.




                                                86
J.1.2   Methods

A total of 1,003 human participants on Prolific (and their digital twins) took part in the study
(50% female, 50% male, 0% other; 𝑀age = 49.37, 𝑆𝐷 = 14.55), following the protocol proposed
by (38). Participants were randomly assigned to one condition in a 2 (Headline Veracity: False vs.
True; within-subjects) × 4 (Intervention: Control vs. Active Control vs. Treatment vs. Importance
Treatment; between-subjects) mixed design (each human and their digital twin were assigned to
the same condition). All participants were asked to indicate how likely they would be to share
16 headlines, displayed in random order, as the dependent variable. Participants in the Control
condition proceeded directly to this task, while participants in the Active Control, Treatment, and
Importance Treatment conditions were first asked to complete the following separate tasks:
   Active Control: Participants were first told that they would help pretest actual news headlines
for future studies. They were then shown a headline and asked to rate, “In your opinion, is the above
headline funny, amusing, or entertaining?” (1-Extremely unfunny, 6-Extremely funny). They were
randomly assigned to see one of four headlines—two of which were true and two of which were
false. The stimuli were the same as (38), with the exception that images were not included, given
that the digital twins cannot process visual images.
   Treatment: Similarly, participants were told that they would help pretest actual news headlines
for future studies. They were then shown two headlines in randomized order and asked to rate,
“In your opinion, is the above headline accurate?” (1-Extremely inaccurate, 6-Extremely accurate).
They were randomly assigned to see one of four headlines—two of which were true and two of
which were false. The stimuli were the same as (38), again with the exception that images were not
included.
   Importance Treatment: Participants were simply asked, “Do you agree or disagree that ‘it is
important to only share content on social media that is accurate and unbiased’?” (1-Strongly agree,
6-Strongly disagree).
   All participants then responded to the dependent variable. Participants were presented with 16
news headlines in randomized order. For each headline, participants were asked to indicate, “If you
were to see the above article on social media, how likely would you be to share it?” (1-Extremely
unlikely, 6-Extremely likely). All headlines were pretested to be entertaining and interesting, but



                                                 87
not identity relevant (39). Eight of the headlines were inspired by real headlines from the websites
of trustworthy news organizations. These headlines were paired with generally trustworthy news
sources. The remaining 8 headlines were false headlines. These headlines were paired with generally
untrustworthy news sources. Source trustworthiness perceptions were confirmed at the end of the
survey. Table 3 provides the headline and source pairings.

Source                         Headline (True or False)

The Funny Times                1. “Rare Pink Bananas Discovered, Touted as Nature’s Cotton
                               Candy” (F)
                               2. “The Real Jurassic Park? Dinosaur DNA Successfully Extracted
                               from Fossil” (F)
Quora.com                      3. “Researchers Develop Plants That Emit Enough Energy to
                               Power a Tiny-House” (F)
                               4. “Innovative Study Finds Dolphins Can Be Trained to Detect
                               Cancer” (F)
The National Enquirer          5. “The Mystery of the Bermuda Triangle: New Theory Suggests
                               Surprising Explanation” (F)
                               6. “Scientists Discover a New Species of Glow-in-the-Dark-Bees
                               in the Amazon” (F)
Reddit.com                     7. “New Fossil Discovery Suggests Rat-Sized Elephants Once
                               Inhabited the Earth” (F)
                               8. “Biologists Stumble Upon a Singing Spider Species, Dubbed
                               ’Nature’s Vocalweaver”’ (F)
The Wall Street Journal        9. “World’s Smallest Gold Coin Features Albert Einstein Sticking
                               Out Tongue” (T)
                               10. “Authorities Scramble To Find Stolen Solid Gold Toilet” (T)
The Economist                  11. “Applications To Become Japanese Billionaire Yusaku
                               Maezawa’s Girlfriend Have Topped 20,000” (T)
                               12. “Woman Boards Flight to Find Her Seat Assignment Is In The
                               Plane’s Bathroom” (T)


                                                  88
Source                         Headline (True or False)

PBS News                       13. “Kansas Man Asks Judge To Allow Him To Have Sword Fight
                               With Ex-Wife” (T)
                               14. “Teen Discovers Rare New Planet 3 Days Into NASA
                               Internship” (T)
BBC News                       15. “Two Elderly Men Sneak Out Of Nursing Home To Attend
                               Heavy Metal Festival” (T)
                               16. “Spotify Launches Playlists For Dogs Left Home Alone” (T)

                   Table 3: Headline and Source Pairings. True and False head-
                   lines are indicated by (T) and (F), respectively. Untrustworthy
                   sources include: The Funny Times, Quora.com, The National
                   Enquirer, and Reddit.com. Trustworthy sources include: The
                   Wall Street Journal, The Economist, PBS News, and BBC
                   News.



   Participants in the Control, Active Control, and Treatment condition next responded to the same
question shown earlier to participants in the Importance Treatment condition: “Do you agree or
disagree that ‘it is important to only share content on social media that is accurate and unbiased’?”
(1-Strongly agree, 6-Strongly disagree). All participants then responded to exploratory questions
intended to capture stated social media sharing preferences. As a measure of goal prioritization when
sharing entertaining news, participants were first asked to indicate, “When you share information
with others on social media, is it more important that the information is:” (1-Verifiably correct,
6-Entertaining; (39)). Participants then indicated, “Would you ever consider sharing news like you
saw in the study today on social media?”.
   All participants then indicated their perceptions of source trustworthiness (“How trustworthy
(from 0–100%) do you think this source is?”) for each source, presented in randomized order.
Participants across conditions rated sources in the True headline veracity condition to be more
trustworthy than sources in the False condition (𝑀True = 72.34%, 𝑆𝐷 = 18.31; 𝑀False = 28.28%,
𝑆𝐷 = 14.00), 𝑡 (2005) = 96.12, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 2.69. Finally, participants indicated whether they

                                                 89
responded randomly at any point in the survey (0.40% = Yes, 99.60% = No) and whether they
searched the internet for any of the headlines (0.40% = Yes, 99.60% = No) before being debriefed,
thanked, and paid.


J.1.3   Results – Pre-registered Analyses

A linear mixed-effects regression was estimated14 with participant as a random effect, average
sharing intentions as the dependent variable, and Participant Type (Human = 0, Digital Twin = 1),
Headline Veracity (False = 0, True = 1), Intervention (Control = 0, Active Control = 1, Treatment
= 2, Importance Treatment = 3), and their interactions as predictors. The results revealed a
significant main effect of Participant Type (𝐹 (1, 2997) = 33.41, 𝑝 < .001), a non-significant main
effect of Headline Veracity (𝐹 (1, 2997) = 1.24, 𝑝 = .27), along with a significant main effect
of Intervention (𝐹 (3, 2997) = 8.89, 𝑝 < .001), qualified by a significant three-way interaction
(𝐹 (3, 2997) = 5.75, 𝑝 < .001), indicating that, at an aggregate level, accuracy nudges affected how
the digital twins shared true vs. false headlines differently than humans. Figure 21 shows average
sharing intentions across all conditions for humans (Panel A) and their digital twins (Panel B). See
Table 4 for the full regression results.
  14 Linear mixed-effects models were estimated using the lmerTest package, which provides 𝑝-values and 𝐹-tests

using Satterthwaite’s approximation.




                                                     90
Figure 21: Sharing Intentions by Headline Veracity and Intervention. NOTE: Error bars indicate
95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors clustered on participant.



                Predictors                  Estimate       Std.        95% CI          t
                                                          Error

                (Intercept)                  2.82***       0.06      [2.70, 2.95]    44.73
             Participant Type                0.32***       0.07      [0.18, 0.46]    4.38
            Headline Veracity                 -0.03        0.07      [-0.17, 0.12]   -0.35
              Active Control                  0.13         0.09      [-0.05, 0.31]   1.46
                Treatment                     -0.04        0.09      [-0.21, 0.14]   -0.42
          Importance Treatment               0.32***       0.09      [0.14, 0.49]    3.56
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity       0.01         0.10      [-0.19, 0.22]   0.13
    Participant Type × Active Control         0.08         0.10      [-0.12, 0.28]   0.80
       Participant Type × Treatment          -0.31**       0.10     [-0.51, -0.11]   -3.00


                                               91
                Predictors                   Estimate        Std.        95% CI            t
                                                             Error

      Participant Type × Importance            -0.20*        0.10      [-0.41, 0.00]     -1.98
                 Treatment
     Participant Type × Active Control         -0.14         0.10      [-0.34, 0.07]     -1.31
       Participant Type × Treatment             0.05         0.10      [-0.16, 0.25]     0.44
      Participant Type × Importance             0.03         0.10      [-0.17, 0.23]     0.30
                 Treatment
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity         0.20         0.15      [-0.09, 0.48]     1.34
             × Active Control
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity       0.57***        0.15      [0.28, 0.85]      3.88
                × Treatment
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity        0.41**        0.15      [0.12, 0.69]      2.81
               × Importance

   Random Effects
                     𝜎2                      0.67
              𝜏00 (TWIN ID)                  0.33
                    ICC                      0.33
               N (TWIN ID)                   1003
               Observations                  4012
       Marginal 𝑅 2 / Conditional 𝑅 2        0.073 / 0.383

                   Table 4: Model A: Random Intercepts. Headline Veracity,
                   Intervention, and Participant Type on Sharing. * 𝑝 < 0.05,
                   ** 𝑝 < 0.01, *** 𝑝 < 0.001.



   For humans, accuracy nudges did not improve truth discernment when sharing entertaining news
(Figure 21, Panel A). As in (38), there were no significant differences in sharing intentions between
the Control and Active Control conditions (Headline Veracity × Intervention: 𝑏 = 0.14, 95% CI


                                                 92
[−0.07, 0.34], 𝑡 (2997) = 1.31, 𝑝 = .56). In contrast to the previous findings, neither accuracy
nudge significantly increased sharing discernment relative to the controls (e.g., Headline Veracity ×
Intervention: Treatment vs. Control, 𝑏 = −0.05, 95% CI [−0.25, 0.16], 𝑡 (2997) = −0.44, 𝑝 = .97;
Importance Treatment vs. Control, 𝑏 = −0.03, 95% CI [−0.23, 0.17], 𝑡 (2997) = −0.30, 𝑝 = .99).
See Table 5 for pairwise comparisons.

               Contrast                    Estimate        SE           df        t-ratio     p-value   95% CI

       Control – Active Control              0.14         0.10        2997         1.31         0.56    [-0.07,
                                                                                                         0.34]
         Control – Treatment                 -0.05        0.10        2997         -0.44        0.97    [-0.25,
                                                                                                         0.16]
         Control – Importance                -0.03        0.10        2997         -0.30        0.99    [-0.23,
                                                                                                         0.17]
      Active Control – Treatment             -0.18        0.10        2997         -1.74        0.30    [-0.38,
                                                                                                         0.02]
     Active Control – Importance             -0.17        0.10        2997         -1.61        0.37    [-0.37,
                                                                                                         0.04]
       Treatment – Importance                0.01         0.10        2997         0.14         1.00    [-0.19,
                                                                                                         0.22]

                                   Table 5: Pairwise comparisons for humans.



   For digital twins, however, accuracy nudges successfully improved truth discernment when
sharing entertaining news (Figure 21, Panel B). As in (38), there were no significant differences
in sharing intentions between the Control and Active Control conditions (Headline Veracity ×
Intervention: 𝑏 = −0.06, 95% CI [−0.26, 0.14], 𝑡 (2997) = −0.58, 𝑝 = .94), and both treatments
significantly increased sharing discernment relative to the controls (e.g., Headline Veracity ×
Intervention: Treatment vs. Control, 𝑏 = −0.61, 95% CI [−0.82, −0.41], 𝑡 (2997) = −5.93, 𝑝 <
.001; Importance Treatment vs. Control, 𝑏 = −0.44, 95% CI [−0.64, −0.24], 𝑡 (2997) = −4.27,
𝑝 < .001). See Table 6 for pairwise comparisons.


                                                 93
   Contrast                          Estimate     SE        df     t-ratio    p-value         95% CI

   Control – Active Control            -0.06     0.10      2997     -0.58       0.94        [-0.26, 0.14]
   Control – Treatment                 -0.61     0.10      2997     -5.93    𝑝 < .001    [-0.82, -0.41]
   Control – Importance                -0.44     0.10      2997     -4.27    𝑝 < .001    [-0.64, -0.24]
   Active Control – Treatment          -0.55     0.10      2997     -5.33    𝑝 < .001    [-0.76, -0.35]
   Active Control – Importance         -0.38     0.10      2997     -3.67    𝑝 < .001    [-0.58, -0.18]
   Treatment – Importance              0.17      0.10      2997     1.68        0.33        [-0.03, 0.38]

                               Table 6: Pairwise comparisons for twins.




J.1.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

The above pre-registered analyses treated participant as a random intercept, capturing individual
differences in baseline sharing intentions but assuming that the effects of the predictors were
consistent across participants. However, this approach does not account for the possibility that
participants may vary in their responsiveness to the manipulations. To provide a more conservative
test, a linear mixed-effects regression was estimated with random intercepts and random slopes
for each within-subject predictor. This specification allows the effects of predictors to vary across
individuals, capturing heterogeneity in participants’ responses. The model fit improved significantly
(𝜒2 (2) = 935.23, 𝑝 < .001), yet the three-way interaction remained significant (𝐹 (3, 1998) =
12.09, 𝑝 < .001), suggesting that the findings from the pre-registered model are robust to alternative
model specifications. See Table 7 for the full regression results.

                 Predictors                     Estimates         SE           95% CI               t

                 (Intercept)                     2.82***          0.07       [2.68, 2.97]         38.92
              Participant Type                   0.32***          0.08       [0.16, 0.48]         3.90
              Headline Veracity                  -0.03            0.05       [-0.12, 0.07]        -0.51
        Condition [Active Control]                0.13            0.10       [-0.07, 0.33]        1.27
                 Treatment                       -0.04            0.10       [-0.24, 0.16]        -0.37
                 Importance                      -0.32**          0.10       [-0.52, -0.12]       -3.09


                                                   94
            Predictors                  Estimates       SE          95% CI           t

Participant Type × Headline Veracity       0.01         0.07      [-0.13, 0.15]    0.20
 Participant Type × Active Control         0.08         0.12      [-0.15, 0.31]    0.71
   Participant Type × Treatment          -0.31**        0.12      [-0.54, -0.08]   -2.67
   Participant Type × Importance          -0.20         0.12      [-0.43, 0.02]    -1.76
 Participant Type × Active Control        -0.14         0.07      [-0.28, 0.00]    -1.90
   Participant Type × Treatment            0.05         0.07      [-0.09, 0.19]    0.64
   Participant Type × Importance           0.03         0.07      [-0.11, 0.17]    0.43
Participant Type × Headline Veracity       0.20         0.10      [-0.00, 0.39]    1.94
         × Active Control
Participant Type × Headline Veracity     0.57***        0.10       [0.37, 0.77]    5.63
            × Treatment
Participant Type × Headline Veracity     0.41***        0.10       [0.21, 0.61]    4.07
           × Importance

Random Effects
                𝜎2                      0.32
          𝜏00 (TWIN ID)                 1.01
  𝜏11 (TWIN ID.ParticipantType)         1.05
          𝜌01 (TWIN ID)                 -0.82
               ICC                      0.68
           N (TWIN ID)                  1003
           Observations                 4012
   Marginal 𝑅 2 / Conditional 𝑅 2       0.073 / 0.706

              Table 7: Model B: Random Intercepts and Random Slopes.
              Headline veracity, intervention, and participant type on shar-
              ing. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.



Additionally, as a robustness check, a linear mixed-effects model with random intercepts and


                                            95
slopes (nested) was estimated to account for the repeated-measures structure of the data, specifically
participants’ repeated responses to multiple headlines. Similar to the pre-registered model with
random intercepts (Model A), this model revealed significant main effects of Participant Type
(𝐹 (1, 999) = 97.25, 𝑝 < .001) as well as a significant effect of Intervention (𝐹 (3, 999) = 17.89,
𝑝 < .001). Crucially, the results also revealed a significant three-way interaction (𝐹 (3, 999) =
12.76, 𝑝 < .001), further suggesting that the findings from the pre-registered model are robust to
alternative model specifications. See Table 8 for the full regression results.

                 Predictors                   Estimates       SE           95% CI             t

                 (Intercept)                   2.82***       0.17        [2.48, 3.16]      16.28
              Participant Type                 0.32***       0.08        [0.16, 0.48]       3.84
             Headline Veracity                  -0.03        0.23        [-0.48, 0.43]     -0.11
               Active Control                   0.13         0.09        [-0.05, 0.31]      1.41
                 Treatment                      -0.04        0.09        [-0.22, 0.14]     -0.41
           Importance Treatment                -0.32***      0.09       [-0.50, -0.14]     -3.45
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity         0.01         0.07        [-0.12, 0.15]      0.20
     Participant Type × Active Control          0.08         0.12        [-0.15, 0.31]      0.70
       Participant Type × Treatment            -0.31**       0.12       [-0.54, -0.08]     -2.63
      Participant Type × Importance             -0.20        0.12        [-0.43, 0.03]     -1.74
    Headline Veracity × Active Control          -0.14        0.07        [-0.28, 0.00]     -1.90
      Headline Veracity × Treatment             0.05         0.07        [-0.09, 0.19]      0.64
      Headline Veracity × Importance            0.03         0.07        [-0.11, 0.17]      0.43
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity         0.20*        0.10        [0.00, 0.39]       1.99
              × Active Control
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity        0.57***       0.10        [0.38, 0.76]       5.78
                × Treatment
   Participant Type × Headline Veracity        0.41***       0.10        [0.22, 0.60]       4.18
               × Importance

   Random Effects
                     𝜎2                       0.97

                                                 96
                 Predictors                  Estimates        SE          95% CI              t

         𝜏00 (group id:TWIN ID)              0.75
              𝜏00 (TWIN ID)                  0.19
              𝜏00 (headline id)              0.21
                     𝜏11                     0.36
    (group id:TWIN ID.Head.Veracity)
       𝜏11 (TWIN ID.Head.Veracity)           0.03
         𝜌01 (group id:TWIN ID)              -0.41
              𝜌01 (TWIN ID)                  -0.52
                    ICC                      0.53
                N (group id)                 2006
               N (TWIN ID)                   1003
              N (headline id)                16
               Observations                  32,096
       Marginal 𝑅 2 / Conditional 𝑅 2        0.037 / 0.546

                   Table 8: Model C: Headline veracity, intervention, and par-
                   ticipant type on sharing (nested random effects). * p<0.05,
                   ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.



   As an additional test, (38) analysis plan was next replicated for humans and their digital twins,
separately. While the pre-registered analysis demonstrates sharing intentions for the full range of
responses, (38) rescale the continuous sharing intentions into a binary variable capturing responses
at or above the midpoint at “likely to share” (= 1) and below the midpoint as “unlikely to share”
(= 0), and filtered out participants who would not consider sharing these articles on social media.
Because the human dataset revealed significant differences between the Control and Active Control
conditions, these groups were not pooled to maintain comparability. This results in a slight deviation
from the analysis in (38). Using this framework, their exact analysis was replicated for humans and
their digital twins separately, treating the rescaled likelihood to share variable as the DV with
Headline Veracity condition, Intervention condition, and their interaction as predictors, applying

                                                  97
robust standard errors. Figure 22 shows proportion of sharing across all conditions for humans
(Panel A) and their digital twins (Panel B).




Figure 22: Proportion (%) Likely to Share by Headline Veracity and Intervention. NOTE: Shown
here is the fraction of “likely’ responses (responses above the midpoint of the six-point Likert
scale) by Headline Veracity and Intervention condition; the full distributions of responses are
shown below, in figure 9. As with (38), these analyses focus only on participants who indicated that
they would consider sharing this social media content. Analysis including all participants does not
change the results. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals based on robust standard errors
clustered on participant and headline.


   Replicating the main findings for humans (Model A), accuracy nudges did not improve truth
discernment when sharing entertaining news (Figure 22, Panel A). In contrast to (38), sharing
discernment was marginally higher in the Active Control compared to the Control condition (Head-
line Veracity × Intervention: 𝑏 = −0.03, 95% CI [−0.07, 0.00], 𝐹 (1, 5132) = 3.53, 𝑝 = .06),
and neither treatment significantly increased sharing discernment relative to the controls (Headline

                                                98
Veracity × Intervention: Treatment, 𝑏 = 0.01, 95% CI [−0.05, 0.06], 𝐹 (1, 9656) = 0.05, 𝑝 = .82;
Importance Treatment, 𝑏 = 0.01, 95% CI [−0.04, 0.05], 𝐹 (1, 9656) = 0.06, 𝑝 = .80). See Table
9 for the full regression results.

                     Humans: Participants who are willing to share content

   Model 1: Controls only

                 Predictors                Estimate        SE         95% CI            t

                  (Intercept)               0.45***        0.03     [0.39, 0.50]      17.82
               Active Control                0.04          0.02     [0.01, 0.09]      1.64
              Headline Veracity              -0.01         0.04     [-0.10, 0.08]     -0.26
    Active Control × Headline Veracity       -0.03         0.02     [-0.07, 0.00]     -1.88

                Observations               5,136
              𝑅 2 / Adjusted 𝑅 2           0.003 / 0.003

   Model 2: All conditions

                 Predictors                Estimate        SE         95% CI            t

                  (Intercept)               0.45***        0.03     [0.39, 0.50]      17.82
               Active Control                0.04          0.02     [-0.01, 0.09]     1.64
              Headline Veracity              -0.01         0.04     [-0.10, 0.08]     -0.26
    Active Control × Headline Veracity       -0.03         0.02     [-0.07, 0.00]     -1.88
                  Treatment                  -0.01         0.03     [-0.07, 0.06]     -0.22
           Importance Treatment             -0.06*         0.03     [-0.12, 0.00]     -2.19
      Treatment × Headline Veracity          0.01          0.03     [-0.05, 0.07]     0.23
     Importance Treatment × Headline         0.01          0.02     [-0.04, 0.06]     0.25
                   Veracity

                Observations               9,664
              𝑅 2 / Adjusted 𝑅 2           0.009 / 0.008




                                              99
                     Humans: Participants who are willing to share content

   Model 1: Controls only

                 Predictors                   Estimate        SE           95% CI          t

                   Table 9: Headline Veracity, Intervention and Participant Type
                   on Humans’ Sharing Intentions. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, ***
                   p<0.001. When reporting the effects, separate F-tests were
                   conducted; therefore, the reported F statistics are not included
                   in this table, following the reporting approach used by (38).



   Again, replicating the main findings for digital twins (Model A), accuracy nudges improved
truth discernment when sharing entertaining news (Figure 22, Panel B). As in (38), there were
no significant differences in sharing intentions between the Control and Active Control conditions
(Headline Veracity × Intervention: 𝑏 = 0.02, 95% CI [−0.02, 0.06], 𝐹 (1, 4046) = 1.17, 𝑝 = .28),
and both treatments significantly increased sharing discernment relative to the controls (Headline
Veracity × Intervention: Treatment, 𝑏 = 0.14, 95% CI [0.08, 0.20], 𝐹 (1, 7208) = 23.30, 𝑝 < .001;
Importance Treatment, 𝑏 = 0.12, 95% CI [0.07, 0.17], 𝐹 (1, 7208) = 21.80, 𝑝 < .001). See Table
10 for the full regression results.

                      Twins: Participants who are willing to share content

   Model 3: Controls only

                 Predictors                   Estimate        SE              CI           t

                 (Intercept)                   0.53***        0.03       [0.46, 0.60]    15.97
               Active Control                  0.04**         0.01       [0.01, 0.07]    3.05
             Headline Veracity                  -0.01         0.08       [-0.18, 0.15]   -0.20
    Active Control × Headline Veracity          0.02          0.02       [0.02, 0.07]    1.08

                Observations                  4,064
              𝑅 2 / Adjusted 𝑅 2              0.018 / 0.017



                                                 100
                     Twins: Participants who are willing to share content

   Model 3: Controls only

                Predictors                   Estimate        SE              CI              t

   Model 4: All conditions

                Predictors                   Estimate        SE              CI              t

                 (Intercept)                  0.53***        0.03       [0.46, 0.60]       15.97
              Active Control                   0.04**        0.01       [0.01, 0.07]        3.05
             Headline Veracity                 -0.01         0.08       [-0.18, 0.15]      -0.20
    Active Control × Headline Veracity          0.02         0.02       [0.02, 0.07]        1.08
                 Treatment                     -0.07*        0.03      [-0.13, -0.02]      -2.81
           Importance Treatment                0.10**        0.02       [0.05, 0.15]       -4.07
      Condition × Headline Veracity           0.14***        0.03       [0.08, 0.20]        4.83
     Importance Treatment × Headline          0.12***        0.03       [0.06, 0.17]        4.67
                  Veracity

               Observations                  7,216
             𝑅 2 / Adjusted 𝑅 2              0.058 / 0.057

                   Table 10: Headline Veracity, Intervention and Participant
                   Type on Twins’ Sharing Intentions. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01,
                   *** p<0.001. When reporting the effects, separate F-tests
                   were conducted; therefore, the reported F statistics are not
                   included in this table, following the reporting approach used
                   by (38).



   Finally, Figure 23 displays the full distribution of individual sharing likelihood ratings for each
participant type across all intervention conditions and headline veracity levels. These distributions
reveal that humans were far more likely to report that they would not share headlines, with many
responses clustering at the low end of the scale. In contrast, digital twins tended to give more


                                                101
moderate responses, with sharing likelihood ratings concentrated around the midpoint and a greater
proportion of “likely to share” responses overall. This pattern suggests that, unlike humans—who
default to inaction—digital twins are generally more inclined to share content.




              Figure 23: Full Distribution of Individual Sharing Likelihood Ratings.


   These additional analyses strengthen confidence in the findings and provide a straightforward
comparison for humans and their digital twins, separately, with the reported findings from (38).


J.1.5   Discussion

These findings extend prior research studying the effectiveness of accuracy nudges in combating
the spread of misinformation (38). Critically, accuracy nudges may have limited effectiveness for
stopping the spread of false entertainment news. While prior research has shown that nudges
can redirect attention toward accuracy and reduce the spread of false information in political
contexts (38), this finding does not seem to generalize to more playful, emotionally engaging
content. Specifically, even when primed to consider accuracy or reminded of its importance, humans
showed no statistically reliable reduction in their willingness to share false versus true entertainment
headlines. Even more, when first prompted to rate the entertainingness of unrelated headlines (i.e.,
Active Control condition), participants were marginally more likely to share false versus true


                                                  102
entertainment headlines, indicating worse discernment. Interestingly, in contrast to humans, digital
twins responded as the prior work would predict, demonstrating robust improvements in truth
discernment in both the Treatment and Importance Treatment conditions.
    One possible reason for this divergence is that digital twins, unlike humans, do not experience the
hedonic appeal of entertaining content. For humans, entertainment may override epistemic goals,
especially when sharing functions as a form of social play or bonding (39). In contrast, digital twins
may more rigidly apply the prioritization embedded in their programming or training data, defaulting
to accuracy in the absence of competing motivations. In this way, digital twins act as idealized
rational agents: models of how people ought to behave if their sole goal was to share accurate
information. In the same vein, twins seem more prone to prioritizing “should” or socially desirable
characteristics (e.g., source trustworthiness) over truly social characteristics (e.g., entertainingness).
But humans operate in a messier reality, where attention is easily hijacked by humor, surprise, or
emotional resonance. This gap underscores a broader challenge in misinformation interventions:
even the most well-intentioned nudges may fall short when the content itself draws attention away
from accuracy.
    From a practical standpoint, the results highlight the limits of one-size-fits-all interventions. If
humans are less responsive to accuracy nudges in hedonic contexts, future interventions may need to
do more than redirect attention—they may need to reshape the perceived function of sharing itself.
For example, interventions could incentivize or socially reward accurate sharing (39), rebalancing
the tradeoff between entertainment and truth. More ambitiously, platforms might redesign their
interfaces to elevate epistemic cues without dampening the joy of social engagement. At a theoretical
level, these findings invite deeper reflection on how models of decision-making should incorporate
context-dependent goals, and how digital twins can help surface not just what people do, but why
they do it.




                                                  103
J.2     Affective Primes

J.2.1    Main Questions/Hypotheses

Research in the social sciences often manipulates emotional states using affective priming, where
participants are asked to reflect on a recent event. In this study, we test whether affective priming
works with digital twins. Specifically, we ask:

   1. Do affective priming manipulations induce “states” in digital twins (e.g., does writing about
        gratitude or lack of control momentarily influence digital twins’ responses?)

   2. Is the influence of affective priming similar for digital twins and their human counterparts?

   3. Is the influence of affective priming on digital twins dependent on the valence of affective
        prime (i.e., between positive primes like gratitude or negative primes like lack of control)
        or the proximal nature of the dependent measures (i.e., does it “spill over” to other, related
        dimensions or only influence proximal dimensions)?


J.2.2    Methods

One thousand human participants on Prolific (and their twins) participated in the study. They were
randomly assigned the same condition in a 2 (affective domain: gratitude vs. lack of control) x 2
(prompt: prime vs. baseline) between-subjects design.
   Participants first responded to a condition-specific prompt for two minutes. For the gratitude
domain, participants received either a gratitude prime (“Please recall carefully and in detail a
specific experience in the past when you felt sincerely grateful for someone’s kindness or help”) or
baseline prompt (“Please recall carefully and in detail the sequence of your morning routine, such
as brushing teeth or changing clothes”), using procedures from (46, 47, 48). In the lack of control
domain, participants received either the lack of control prime (“Please recall a particular incident
in which something happened and you did not have control over the situation. Please describe the
situation in which you felt a lack of control – what happened, how you felt, etc.”) or a baseline
prompt (“Please recall a particular incident in which something happened and you were in control
of the situation. Please describe the situation in which you felt in control – what happened, how
you felt, etc.”), using procedures from (49, 50, 51, 52).

                                                  104
   After the writing task, participants completed a manipulation check, followed by proximal
dependent measures (closely related to the target affective state) and distal dependent measures
(more distantly related to the affective state). For the gratitude domain, the manipulation check
assessed gratitude-related emotions (grateful, thankful, appreciative) on a 7-point scale from “not
at all” to “extremely.” The proximal measure used the Elevation scale (53, 54), which asked
participants to rate their current feelings on six items such as “Feeling optimistic about humanity”
using the same 7-point scale. The distal measure employed an adapted version of the Empathic
Concern scale (55), measuring agreement with two statements, “I am very concerned about those
most vulnerable to the effects of tariffs” and “I feel compassion for those most affected by rising
prices or job losses due to tariffs,” on a 7-point scale from “completely disagree” to “completely
agree.”
   For the lack of control domain, the manipulation check used items from (56), asking participants
to rate their agreement with three statements (“I feel in control of my life”, “I am free to live my life
how I wish”, “My experiences in life are due to my own actions”, on a 7-point scale from “not at
all” to “extremely.” These items were reverse coded for the analysis, but we present the raw means
before reverse coding in the graph. The proximal measure was the Fatigue scale (57,49), consisting
of nine items such as “I had a hard time thinking about the event” rated on the same 7-point scale.
The distal measure employed the Desire for Predictability scale (58,51), containing eight items like
“would not like to go into a situation without knowing what I can expect from it” rated on a 7-point
scale from “completely disagree” to “completely agree.”


J.2.3     Results - Pre-registered Analyses

First, the scales demonstrated strong internal consistency for both humans and digital twins. For
Digital Twins: gratitude manipulation check (𝛼 = .998), elevation scale (𝛼 = .964), empathic
concern measure (𝛼 = .992), lack of control manipulation check (𝛼 = .951), fatigue scale (𝛼 =
.897), and desire for predictability measure (𝛼 = .931). For Humans: gratitude manipulation check
(𝛼 = .979), elevation scale (𝛼 = .917), empathic concern measure (𝛼 = .909), lack of control
manipulation check (𝛼 = .830), fatigue scale (𝛼 = .766), and desire for predictability measure
(𝛼 = .866). As a result, we created a composite variable for each measure by averaging the
respective items.

                                                  105
   Following our pre-registered analysis plan, we then averaged the outcome measures in the grat-
itude domain (elevation, empathic concern; 𝑟 = .38) to create an aggregate downstream dependent
variable for gratitude, and averaged the outcome measures in the lack of control domain (fatigue,
desire for predictability; 𝑟 = .09) to create an aggregate downstream dependent variable for lack of
control. We also examined effects by individual measure.
   Manipulation Check
   To examine the effect of affective priming on humans versus digital twins for both gratitude
and lack of control, we ran a linear mixed-effects regression using the lmerTest package in
R (Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2017) with the manipulation check measure as the
dependent variable; affective domain (gratitude vs. feeling in control), prompt (prime vs. baseline),
twin (human vs. digital), and their interactions as independent variables; and twin identifier as a
random intercept. We did not observe a significant three-way interaction (𝑏 = −0.17, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.17,
𝑡 (996) = −1.01, 𝑝 = .314), but several interesting two-way interactions emerged, which we detail
below.
   First, affective priming manipulations successfully induced “states” in both digital twins and
humans. The prompt (prime vs. baseline) had a significant effect on manipulation checks for digital
twins in both the gratitude domain (𝑀baseline = 4.34, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.17; 𝑀prime = 5.67, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.71;
𝑏 = 1.33, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1760) = 12.93, 𝑝 < .001) and the lack of control domain (𝑀baseline = 2.79,
𝑆𝐷 = 0.86; 𝑀prime = 3.79, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.95; 𝑏 = 1.00, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1760) = 9.55, 𝑝 < .001), as well
as for humans in the gratitude domain (𝑀baseline = 5.19, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.56; 𝑀prime = 6.00, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.33;
𝑏 = 0.81, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1760) = 7.91; 𝑝 < .001) and the lack of control domain (𝑀baseline = 2.81,
𝑆𝐷 = 1.16; 𝑀prime = 3.12, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.29; 𝑏 = 0.32, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1760) = 3.02, 𝑝 = .003).
   Second, the effect of priming was significantly stronger for digital twins than for humans in both
affective domains. Digital twins showed greater responsiveness to the prompt (prime vs. baseline)
in both the gratitude domain (interaction: 𝑏 = −0.52, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.12; 𝑡 (996) = −4.45, 𝑝 < .001)
and the lack of control domain (interaction: 𝑏 = −0.68, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.12; 𝑡 (996) = −5.79, 𝑝 < .001),
compared to humans (see Figure 24).
   Finally, the prompt (prime vs. baseline) produced stronger effects in the gratitude domain than in
the lack of control domain for both digital twins (𝑏 = 0.33, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.15; 𝑡 (1760) = 2.26, 𝑝 = .024)
and humans (𝑏 = 0.50, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.15; 𝑡 (1760) = 3.39, 𝑝 < .001).


                                                106
                 Figure 24: Effect of Affective Prime on Manipulation Check.


   Dependent Measures
   We next examined how affective priming in digital twins affects downstream dependent
measures—that is, do these “affective states” spill over onto other measures? To test this, we
ran a linear mixed-effects regression with the aggregate dependent variable measure as the de-
pendent variable; affective domain (gratitude vs. lack of control), prompt (prime vs. baseline),
twin (human vs. digital), and their interaction as independent variables; and twin identifier as a
random intercept. We did not observe a significant three-way interaction (𝑏 = −0.13, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.11,
𝑡 (996) = −1.17, 𝑝 = .242), but two significant two-way interactions emerged, which we detail
below.
   First, affective priming manipulations spilled over onto downstream dependent measures for
both digital twins and humans. The prompt (prime vs. baseline) had a significant effect on down-
stream measures for digital twins in both the gratitude domain (𝑀baseline = 4.39, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.11;
𝑀prime = 4.90, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.05; 𝑏 = 0.50, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08; 𝑡 (1538) = 6.01; 𝑝 < .001) and the lack of
control domain (𝑀baseline = 3.92, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.60; 𝑀prime = 4.38, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.68; 𝑏 = 0.46, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09;
𝑡 (1538) = 5.45; 𝑝 < .001), as well as for humans in the gratitude domain (𝑀baseline = 4.82,


                                               107
𝑆𝐷 = 1.15; 𝑀prime = 5.21, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.23; 𝑏 = 0.81, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1760) = 7.91; 𝑝 < .001) and
the lack of control domain (𝑀baseline = 3.83, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.76; 𝑀prime = 4.05, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.69; 𝑏 = 0.32,
𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1760) = 3.02; 𝑝 = .003). See Figure 25.
   Second, the effect of priming on downstream dependent measures was significantly stronger
for digital twins than humans for lack of control priming (𝑏 = −0.25, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08; 𝑡 (996) = −3.05;
𝑝 = .002), but not for gratitude (𝑏 = −0.11, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08; 𝑡 (996) = −1.43; 𝑝 = .153).
   Finally, the gratitude prime did not produce stronger effects than the lack of control prime for
digital twins (𝑏 = 0.04, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.12; 𝑡 (1538) = 0.33; 𝑝 = .744), but gratitude produced stronger
effects for humans (𝑏 = 0.50, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.15; 𝑡 (1760) = 3.39; 𝑝 < .001).




           Figure 25: Effect of Affective Prime on Aggregate Downstream Outcomes.


   Individual Dependent Measures
   We also pre-registered analyses examining each dependent measure independently. Thus, we ran
four linear mixed-effects regressions with (1) elevation, (2) empathic concern, (3) fatigue, and (4)
desire for predictability as the dependent variable; condition (manipulation vs. control), twin (human
vs. digital), and their interaction as independent variables; and twin identifier as a random intercept.
Each measure’s simple effect for prompt (prime vs. baseline) was significant for both humans and
digital twins, except empathic concern, which was marginal for twins (𝑀baseline = 5.04, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.48;

                                                  108
𝑀prime = 5.28, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.40; 𝑏 = 0.24, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14; 𝑡 (731) = 1.74, 𝑝 = .082) and not significant
for humans (𝑀baseline = 5.45, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.61; 𝑀prime = 5.44, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.64; 𝑏 = −0.01, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14;
𝑡 (731) = −0.07, 𝑝 = .947), as well as desire for predictability, which was not significant for twins
(𝑀baseline = 5.54, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.04; 𝑀prime = 5.59, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.04; 𝑏 = 0.05, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09; 𝑡 (718) = 0.47;
𝑝 = .636).
   The effect of prompt (prime vs. baseline) on elevation did not differ between digital twins
and humans (𝑏 = 0.02, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.20; 𝑡 (506) = 0.16, 𝑝 = .872). The effect of prompt (prime vs.
baseline) was stronger for humans than digital twins for empathic concern (𝑏 = 0.25, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.12;
𝑡 (506) = 2.08; 𝑝 = .039) and fatigue (𝑏 = 0.70, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09; 𝑡 (490) = 8.26; 𝑝 < .001). The effect
of prompt on desire for predictability was also stronger for humans than for digital twins (𝑏 = 0.21,
𝑆𝐸 = 0.08; 𝑡 (490) = 2.45; 𝑝 = .015). See Figure 26.




   Figure 26: Measures by Prompt (Prime vs. Baseline) Grouped by Measure and Twin Type.


J.2.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

Here, we examined the language used when responding to the prompt. Specifically, we examined
the language similarity between a human participant’s response and their twin versus a human


                                                109
participant’s response and a randomly selected twin using the BERT metric, defined as “the sum
of cosine similarities between their tokens’ embeddings” (59). In a random-effects regression
with language matching as the dependent variable; same-twin versus different-twin pairing as
the independent variable; condition as a covariate; and human participant identifier as a random
effect, we found that the language between a human participant and their twin was slightly more
similar (𝑀 = 0.11, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.09) than between a human participant and a random twin (𝑀 = 0.13,
𝑆𝐷 = 0.10; 𝑏 = 0.014, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.002; 𝑡 (999) = 5.54; 𝑝 < .001). Figure 27 shows this by condition.




Figure 27: Similarity Between Human Prompt Text and Their Digital Twin’s Prompt Text vs. a
Random Digital Twin’s Prompt Text.


J.2.5    Discussion

Returning to each research question:

   1. Do affective priming manipulations induce “states” in digital twins (e.g., does writing about
        gratitude or lack of control momentarily influence digital twins’ responses?)

   Yes. Writing about feeling grateful or out of control significantly increased corresponding
feelings of gratitude and lack of control in digital twins, with these induced “affective states”
subsequently influencing downstream outcomes.

                                                 110
   2. Is the influence of affective priming similar for digital twins and their human counterparts?

   No. Affective priming had stronger effects on digital twins’ affective responses compared to
humans for both gratitude and lack of control manipulations.

   3. Is the influence of affective priming on digital twins dependent on the valence of affective
      prime (i.e., between positive primes like gratitude or negative primes like lack of control)
      or the proximal nature of the dependent measures (i.e., does it “spill over” to other, related
      dimensions or only influence proximal dimensions)?

   Valence. Yes, valence affects twins’ responses, but in a similar way to humans: The gratitude
prime had a stronger effect on the manipulation check than the lack of control prime for both
humans and their twins.
   Proximal Nature of DVs. Yes, the influence of affective priming on digital twins is dependent
on how closely related the dependent measure is to the manipulation. Specifically, the impact of
affective prime on proximal dependent measures was consistent and as expected for both twins and
humans, but impact of affective prime on distal downstream measures was inconsistent between
twins and humans.
   For proximal dependent measures (measures closely linked to the manipulation), we observe
a “spillover” effect of prime in both the gratitude prime and lack of control prime for humans
and twins. For the distal downstream measure (more distantly related to the manipulation) in the
gratitude condition, the impact of affective prime was marginal for twins and non-significant for
humans. For the distal downstream measure in the lack of control condition, the impact of affective
prime was non-significant for twins and significant for humans.

   4. Is there a relationship between what digital twins and their human counterparts say in their
      response to the manipulation?

   Yes. The language between a human participant and their twin is slightly more similar than
between a human participant and a random twin.




                                               111
J.3     Consumer Minimalism

J.3.1    Main Questions/Hypotheses

We explored the predictive validity of the minimalism scale in a sample of human respondents
versus their digital twins. As in the original paper on consumer minimalism (60), we expect that
human respondents and their digital twins who score high on the Minimalist Consumer Scale will
prefer minimalist home environments over non-minimalist interiors.


J.3.2    Methods

We recruited 200 human respondents on Prolific and their respective twins. In random order,
participants completed the 12 randomized items of the Minimalist Consumer Scale (𝑀human = 4.84,
𝑆𝐷 human = 1.17, 𝛼human = .93; 𝑀twin = 4.52, 𝑆𝐷 twin = 1.47, 𝛼twin = .94), and indicated their
preference for four sets of minimalist versus non-minimalist interiors, presented in random order.
All stimuli were pretested and validated in Study 7e of the Consumer Minimalism paper (60)).
   In the first two sets, human participants looked at two pairs of images (Figure 28) and indicated
whether they would rather live in one of two apartments (“Which apartment would you rather live
in?”) and whether they found one of two wardrobes more appealing (“Which wardrobe is more
appealing to you?”). In the third set, they read the following descriptions of two bedrooms:
   Here are the descriptions of two bedrooms.

        First option: A vibrant bedroom filled with colorful patterns, featuring a mix of floral
        and botanical prints on the bedding and wallpaper. A variety of throw pillows, unique
        lamps, and framed artwork create a bold, eclectic, and lively atmosphere.

        Second option: A minimalist bedroom has a light wood platform bed with white
        bedding, two pillows, and a neatly folded gray blanket. On one side is a small round
        table with a plant, and on the other is a clear bedside unit holding a few essentials.

        Which bedroom do you like more?

   Finally, respondents read the following descriptions of two home offices for the fourth set:

        Here are the descriptions of two home offices

                                                  112
  First option: A minimalist and modern home office featuring a floating wooden desk, a
  sleek grey swivel chair, and a clean setup with a desktop computer and lamp. Built-in
  shelves with books and decor, along with floor-to-ceiling neutral curtains, create a
  clean atmosphere.

  Second option: A cozy and eclectic home office combines functionality with vibrant per-
  sonality, featuring a metal-framed desk, a patterned chair, and layered storage options
  including woven baskets and open shelving. Colorful textiles, books, and decorative
  accents add warmth and charm.

  Which home office would you prefer to be yours?”




                    Figure 28: Visual Stimuli for Human Respondents.

All preferences were recorded on a seven-point Likert scale (1 = definitely the one on the left, 4

                                             113
= equal preference, 7 = definitely the one on the right). Before the analyses, we coded all response
scales so that higher values indicate stronger preferences for minimalist options. Importantly, the
digital twins read an AI-generated description of the visual stimuli displayed for human respondents.
This intentional feature of the study design enables us to test whether the predictive validity of the
scale holds even when twins read descriptions while their human counterparts see images.
   For the two apartments’ images, digital twins read:

      Below, are pictures of rooms in two different apartments. Which apartment would you
      rather live in? Left Side: The room contains a large number of objects and furnishings.
      There are two upholstered armchairs (one dark purple, one reddish-brown) and a
      small ottoman. Behind the seating area is a wooden desk with a computer monitor
      and keyboard, along with a painted wooden chair. Shelving units and surfaces are
      densely populated with plants, CDs, books, and various small objects. Numerous
      framed pictures, posters, and a “SLOW” traffic sign cover the wall. There is a table
      lamp with a brown shade and a stereo system beneath a collection of compact discs.
      Additional furniture includes a small bookshelf filled with vinyl records and a mirror
      partially obscured by plants. Several types of plants are placed throughout the room in
      pots and containers. Right Side: The room contains fewer items and furnishings. There
      are two windows with black frames and visible trees outside. A light-gray upholstered
      sofa sits on the right side of the room. A black leather and wood lounge chair is
      positioned in the center. A small wooden cabinet with a box on top is located between
      the two windows. Wall-mounted decorative tiles or panels are arranged in a square
      above the cabinet. Plants are placed on the windowsills and hanging from planters. A
      wall-mounted reading lamp is affixed above the sofa. The floor is light-colored wood.

   For the two wardrobes’ images, digital twins read:

      Below, are pictures of two wardrobes. Which wardrobe is more appealing to you? Left
      Side: Contains approximately 20 garments hanging on a single rod, organized by color
      from dark to light. All garments are on matching white hangers. Colors are limited
      to black, white, gray, beige, and similar tones. Shoes are placed on two open shelves:
      one at floor level and one elevated. There are three visible boxes or containers: two

                                                 114
        cylindrical and one rectangular. The closet space includes built-in white drawers and
        shelves. A small rug is placed on the floor. Handbags and boxes are stored on a top
        shelf above the hanging clothes. All visible surfaces, including the walls, shelves, and
        drawers, are white. Right Side: Contains a larger number of garments (approximately
        70+) on a double-length rod. Garments vary in color, pattern, and length. Hangers
        are mostly dark, with some white or wooden hangers mixed in. Items are densely
        packed along the hanging rod. Below the clothing rod are multiple open cubbies filled
        with folded clothes, shoes, bags, and miscellaneous items. The top shelf holds several
        handbags and boxes. A patterned rug is partially visible on the floor. The shelving units
        are white, and the wall behind the closet is gray. There is a glass-front cabinet on the
        left side containing additional shoes or items.

   Across sets, we varied whether the minimalist or non-minimalist images appeared on the left or
the right of the screen and whether the minimalist or non-minimalist description appeared first or
second.


J.3.3    Results - Pre-registered Analyses

We ran a series of OLS regressions with participants’ average score on the Minimalist Consumer
Scale as the independent variable and preferences for each option as the dependent variable. As
predicted, results indicated that higher scores on the scale were associated with stronger preferences
for the minimalist option in each set and in both samples.
   More specifically, higher scores on the Minimalist Consumer Scale predicted stronger prefer-
ences

   1. for the minimalist apartment in both the human (𝛽 = .56, 𝑡 (198) = 9.56, 𝑝 < .001) and the
        digital (𝛽 = .60, 𝑡 (198) = 10.54, 𝑝 < .001) samples;

   2. for the minimalist wardrobe in both the human (𝛽 = .44, 𝑡 (198) = 6.85, 𝑝 < .001) and the
        digital (𝛽 = .65, 𝑡 (198) = 11.92, 𝑝 < .001) samples;

   3. for the minimalist bedroom in both the human (𝛽 = .46, 𝑡 (198) = 7.36, 𝑝 < .001) and the
        digital (𝛽 = .57, 𝑡 (198) = 9.79, 𝑝 < .001) samples; and

                                                  115
   4. for the minimalist home office in both the human (𝛽 = .44, 𝑡 (198) = 6.80, 𝑝 < .001) and the
      digital (𝛽 = .64, 𝑡 (198) = 11.55, 𝑝 < .001) samples (see Figure 29).

    There was no significant effect of order, nor interaction between scores on the Minimalist
Consumer Scale and whether participants completed the scale before or after indicating their
preferences for the different sets. Moreover, the design feature for the first two sets—with images
for humans and AI-generated descriptions for the digital sample—did not yield differences in the
results. A regression with interiors preferences as dependent variable, and minimalism (𝑧-scores),
whether the stimuli appeared as images or text (coded as 1 and −1, respectively), and their interaction
as predictors, while controlling for human respondent vs. digital twin, did not reveal a significant
interaction (𝑏 interaction = −0.13, 𝑝 = .249).
    In other words, the fact that humans saw images and digital twins read descriptions for the first
two sets of interiors did not interfere with the overall results.




                      Figure 29: Results. Note: the dots indicate the raw data.


    A comparison of the standardized regression coefficients suggests that the results were slightly
stronger in the digital sample than in the human population. A series of 𝑡-tests comparing the
preference for the minimalist environment for the humans and their twin counterparts suggests
that, on average, the twins liked the minimalist environments more (apartment: 𝑀human = 4.53 vs.
𝑀twin = 5.11, 𝑡 (398) = 2.69, 𝑝 = .007; wardrobe: 𝑀human = 4.89 vs. 𝑀twin = 5.68, 𝑡 (398) = 3.91,

                                                  116
𝑝 < .001; bedroom: 𝑀human = 4.36 vs. 𝑀twin = 5.49, 𝑡 (398) = 5.45, 𝑝 < .001; home office:
𝑀human = 4.30 vs. 𝑀twin = 5.23, 𝑡 (398) = 4.39, 𝑝 < .001).
   We also examined the test–retest reliability of the Minimalist Consumer Scale in the human
sample between collection rounds, given that the scale was collected twice (approximately four
and a half months apart): once as part of a large battery of measures to generate the digital twins
(February 1, 2025) and once as part of this specific validity study on the Minimalist Consumer
Scale (June 12, 2025). The correlation of the Minimalist Consumer Scale between the two collection
rounds was large (𝑟 = .75, 𝑝 < .001), confirming that the scale has high test–retest reliability (Peter,
1979).
   A mixed-effects generalized linear model with random intercepts for participants, with pref-
erence for the minimalist interiors as dependent variable, and the Minimalist Consumer Scale,
an indicator for data type (coded as 1 for human and 2 for digital twin), and their interaction as
predictors, revealed an effect of minimalism (𝛽 = .73, 𝑡 (1,593) = 11.69, 𝑝 < .001), an effect
for digital twins (𝛽 = .71, 𝑡 (1,593) = 2.36, 𝑝 = .019), and no significant interaction (𝛽 = .08,
𝑡 (1,593) = 1.34, 𝑝 = .179). The same model estimated with OLS regression revealed similar
results: an effect of minimalism (𝛽 = .88, 𝑡 (1,596) = 16.49, 𝑝 < .001), an effect for digital twins
(𝛽 = 1.34, 𝑡 (1,596) = 4.02, 𝑝 < .001), and no significant interaction (𝛽 = −0.05, 𝑡 (1,596) = −0.67,
𝑝 = .503).


J.3.4    Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

An analysis of the reasonings of five digital twins suggests that they expressed preferences in line
with their minimalist orientations. For example, one twin reasoned, “My preferences lean toward
vibrant, lively, and eclectic environments rather than minimalism. I feel more comfortable in spaces
with lots of patterns, colors, and personal touches, making the first bedroom my clear favorite,”
and accordingly selected the non-minimalist option with a strong preference; in contrast, another
twin reasoned, “I like a clean, organized, and calm environment for a home office. The minimalist
and modern option fits my preferences for simplicity and order” and accordingly selected the
minimalist option with a strong preference. The “extremeness” of these thoughts may possibly
explain the relatively higher strength of the findings in the digital twins sample compared to the
human sample. In other words, when it comes to the association between the minimalism scale and

                                                  117
expressed preferences for room environments the twins tend to be more polarized than their human
counterparts.


J.3.5   Discussion

In conclusion, this study demonstrates that the predictive validity of the Minimalist Consumer Scale
documented in human samples replicates robustly in a digital twin sample. Specifically, the study
demonstrates that the scale predicts consumers’ preferences for minimalist versus non-minimalist
apartment interiors.




                                                118
J.4     Context Effects

J.4.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Context effects are of great interest to marketers and policy makers alike because they suggest
that product assortment can change choice. This study focuses on two classic context effects.
The attraction effect occurs when a third option - an asymmetrically dominated decoy - is added
to a binary choice set, increasing preference for the option that dominates the decoy (33). The
compromise effect occurs when a different type of decoy is added to a binary choice set, one
that makes one of the original options appear as a compromise between the other two, increasing
preference for the compromise option (34).
   This study tests whether digital twins trained from LLMs can accurately predict individual
choices in product purchase settings designed to elicit the attraction and compromise effects, using
newly developed stimuli that twin models could not have encountered during training.


J.4.2   Methods

Following an initial practice trial, all participants completed via Qualtrics three hypothetical product
purchase decisions: one binary choice, and two trinary choices designed to elicit the attraction
and compromise effects, respectively. The order of the three trials was counterbalanced across
participants.
   In each trial, participants were presented with a hypothetical purchase scenario and asked to
choose between product options described in text by their price and quality features. Each trial was
randomly assigned to one of the following three product categories: a printer, a TV, and a telephone
plan. Importantly, all stimuli were newly developed for this study and could not have appeared in
the digital twins’ training data.
   501 human participants (48% female, 52% male; 9% aged 18-29, 33% aged 30–49, 35% aged
50–64, 23% aged 65+) on Prolific completed the task. The study was subsequently run on their 501
digital twins. Human participants and their corresponding digital twins completed the same trials.
   We recorded both choices and time spent on each decision for human participants, and only
choice for digital twins.




                                                  119
J.4.3    Results - Pre-registered Analyses

We began our analysis by testing whether humans and digital twins replicated the attraction and
compromise effects. As preregistered, we excluded practice trials and combined the datasets from
both humans and digital twins and created customized contrasts: for the attraction effect, attraction
trials were coded as 1, binary trials as -1, and all other trials as 0. A similar coding scheme was
used for the compromise effect. We ran binomial mixed-effect models predicting the choice of the
target option. We included dataset and product type as fixed effects and accounted for the multilevel
structure of the data by modeling respondent-level random intercepts, treating each human and
their digital twin as separate entities. Each contrast was nested within the human and digital twin
datasets to separately capture the effects within each dataset.15
    As shown in Figure 30, for the attraction effect, we replicated prior literature and found a
significant effect among humans (𝛽 = 0.18, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07, 𝑧 = 2.56, 𝑝 = .01). However, we did not
detect an effect among digital twins (𝛽 = −0.24, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14, 𝑧 = −1.67, 𝑝 = .10). Unexpectedly,
we observed a strong main effect of dataset, such that digital twins made substantially more target
choices overall (𝛽 = 2.84, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.16, 𝑧 = 17.30, 𝑝 < .001).
    For the compromise effect, neither humans nor digital twins replicated prior results. No effect
was found for humans (𝛽 = 0.06, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07, 𝑧 = 0.87, 𝑝 = .38), and a significant negative
effect was found for digital twins (𝛽 = −0.54, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.15, 𝑧 = −3.59, 𝑝 < .001). Again,
we observed a strong main effect of dataset, with digital twins making substantially more target
choices (𝛽 = 2.90, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.17, 𝑧 = 17.16, 𝑝 < .001).
  15 The nested model is a reparameterization of the preregistered interaction model. It is statistically equivalent but

provides a more direct and interpretable test of the effect in each dataset.




                                                           120
Figure 30: The target option refers to the option whose choice likelihood is expected to increase
due to the addition of a decoy option. Vertical bars represent ±1 standard deviation based on raw
data. Asterisks indicate significance levels derived from model-based contrast analyses: * 𝑝 < .05,
** 𝑝 < .01, *** 𝑝 < .001; ns = not significant.


    We also evaluated how accurately digital twins predicted human choices, independent of whether
they predicted context effects. To examine possible variation in prediction accuracy by trial type,
we broke the analysis down across binary, attraction, and compromise trials. For each trial, we
created a binary variable denoting whether the digital twin correctly predicted the participant’s
choice.16 As a benchmark, we compared digital twin’s accuracy level to that of a baseline model
that randomly selected among the available options.
    We found that digital twins predicted human choices more accurately than the random baseline
across all trial types. Specifically, twins achieved 58% accuracy on binary trials (paired 𝑡 (500) =
  16 We created an indicator variable denoting whether the digital twin correctly predicted the participant’s choice and

used a McNemar test for analysis, rather than the preregistered correlation, as it is more appropriate for discrete choice
outcomes.


                                                          121
2.86, 𝑝 = .004 vs. the 50% baseline), 59% on attraction trials (𝑡 (500) = 8.52, 𝑝 < .001 vs. 33%),
and 55% on compromise trials (𝑡 (500) = 8.04, 𝑝 < .001 vs. 33%). Results were consistent when
using McNemar’s test, which evaluates the dichotomous accuracy indicator as a nominal variable
rather than with a 𝑡-test.


J.4.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

Using response time data from human trials, we explored whether attention moderated the observed
context effects. We constructed an attention factor based on log-transformed response times from
binary, attraction, and compromise trials, and included interactions between this factor and the
contrast variables in the nested model.
   Among human participants, attention significantly moderated the compromise effect (𝛽 =
0.17, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07, 𝑧 = 2.32, 𝑝 = .02), such that more attentive participants exhibited a significant
compromise effect: a Johnson–Neyman analysis indicated the effect became statistically significant
at values above 0.61 standard deviations of attention (relative to the mean), under a 𝑝 < .05
threshold. No interaction was observed for the attraction effect (𝛽 = 0.08, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07, 𝑧 =
1.06, 𝑝 = .29).
   Attention factor derived from human participants did not moderate either context effect in
the twin dataset (attraction: 𝛽 = −0.002, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14, 𝑧 = −0.01, 𝑝 = .99; compromise:
𝛽 = −0.12, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14, 𝑧 = −0.81, 𝑝 = .42).


J.4.5   Discussion

We examined if large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT can accurately predict the choices
made by humans. In the current study, we successfully replicated the attraction effect in the human
dataset, but digital twins did not reproduce this effect. Neither humans nor digital twins exhibited
a compromise effect. However, the compromise effect was significant among human participants
who paid more attention, as measured by response time. Independent of predicting context effects,
digital twins showed only modest accuracy (less than 60% overall) in predicting individual human
choices. These findings highlight cautions when using digital twins to predict human decisions in
applied settings such as consumer choice.



                                                122
J.5     Default Effects

J.5.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

This study focuses on two default effects: the organ donation paradigm by (32), and a green
energy default paradigm promoting sustainable energy choices (35). In the organ donation study,
participants who were defaulted to be donors were significantly more likely to remain enrolled than
those who had to actively opt in. Similarly, in the green energy study, defaulting participants into
using green energy suppliers increased adoption rates compared to requiring them to opt in.
   This study tests whether digital twins trained from LLMs can accurately predict individual
choices in these two settings, using the original organ donation stimuli verbatim and a slightly
adapted version of the green energy scenario.


J.5.2   Methods

All participants completed the original organ donation as well as the adjusted paradigm, presented
in counterbalanced order. Across both default tasks, participants were randomly assigned to either
an opt-in or an opt-out condition. In the organ donation task, participants in the opt-in condition
were told they were not organ donors by default and were asked whether they wanted to become
one. In the opt-out condition, participants were told they were organ donors by default and could
choose to change that status. In the green energy default task, participants in the opt-in condition
were told they were defaulted to the more affordable (non-green) energy option, while those in the
opt-out condition were defaulted to the green energy option.
   Notably, the organ donation task used the original stimuli from (32), while the green energy
default task was slightly modified by changing the company names for the affordable and sustainable
options.
   600 human participants (47% female, 53% male; 11% aged 18–29, 33% aged 30–49, 34% aged
50–64, 22% aged 65+) on Prolific completed the task. The study was subsequently run on their 600
digital twins. Participants and their corresponding digital twins were assigned the same conditions.
   We recorded both choices and time spent on each decision for human participants, and only
choice for digital twins.




                                                123
J.5.3    Results - Pre-registered Analyses

We began our analysis by testing whether humans and digital twins replicated default effects in
organ donation and green energy choice. As preregistered, for each default task, we combined
data across both humans and digital twins and created a customized contrast: opt-out trials were
coded as 1, opt-in trials as -1. We accounted for the multilevel structure of the data by including
respondent-level random intercepts, treating each human and their digital twin as separate entities.
This contrast was nested within human and digital twin datasets to separately estimate effects within
each dataset.17
    As depicted in Figure 31, in the green energy task, humans showed a large effect and replicated
prior literature (𝛽 = 0.50, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08, 𝑧 = 5.98, 𝑝 < .001), while digital twins did not (𝛽 =
0.14, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08, 𝑧 = 1.73, 𝑝 = .08). We observed no main effect of dataset on green energy
option adoption (𝛽 = −0.22, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.12, 𝑧 = −1.86, 𝑝 = .06).
    In the organ donation task, we detected no effect among humans (𝛽 = 0.09, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08, 𝑧 =
1.10, 𝑝 = .28), but a large effect among digital twins (𝛽 = 0.92, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.11, 𝑧 = 8.61, 𝑝 < .001).
In addition, we observed a main effect of dataset, such that digital twins were more likely to become
organ donors overall (𝑀Human = 59%, 𝑀Twin = 71%, 𝛽 = 0.75, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14, 𝑧 = 5.53, 𝑝 < .001).
Though this effect may be primarily driven by the difference in the opt-out condition (𝑀Human =
61%, 𝑀Twin = 88%).
  17 The nested model is a reparameterization of the preregistered interaction model. It is statistically equivalent but

provides a more direct and interpretable test of the effect in each dataset.




                                                           124
Figure 31: Target behavior refers to adopting a green energy provider in the green energy paradigm
and registering as an organ donor in the organ donation paradigm. Vertical bars represent ±1
standard deviation based on raw data. Asterisks indicate significance levels derived from model-
based contrast analyses: * 𝑝 < .05, ** 𝑝 < .01, *** 𝑝 < .001; ns = not significant.


    We next examined how closely digital twins predicted human choices, independent of whether
they predicted the default effects. For each trial, we created an indicator variable denoting whether
the digital twin correctly predicted the participant’s choice.18 As a benchmark, we compared digital
twin’s accuracy level to that of a baseline model that randomly selected among the available options.
    Across both paradigms, digital twins outperformed the random baseline. Specifically, twins
achieved 69% accuracy on the green energy paradigm (paired t-test against 50% baseline, 𝑡 (599) =
7.11, 𝑝 < .001), and 58% on the organ donation paradigm (against 50%, 𝑡 (599) = 2.99, 𝑝 =
.003). Results were consistent when using McNemar’s test, which treats the dichotomous accuracy
  18 We created an indicator variable denoting whether the digital twin correctly predicted the participant’s choice and

used a McNemar test for analysis, rather than the preregistered correlation, as it is more appropriate for discrete choice
outcomes.


                                                          125
indicator as a nominal variable, instead of the t-test.


J.5.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

Using response time data from human trials, we explored whether attention moderated the observed
context effects. We included interaction terms between the log-transformed and centered response
time for each trial and the contrast variables in the nested model. We found no statistically significant
moderation effects for either human participants (green energy: 𝛽 = −0.01, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09, 𝑧 =
−0.15, 𝑝 = .88; organ donation: 𝛽 = −0.15, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09, 𝑧 = −1.71, 𝑝 = .09). Response time
derived from the human dataset also did not moderate the effects in the digital twin models (green
energy: 𝛽 = 0.06, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08, 𝑧 = 0.77, 𝑝 = .44; organ donation: 𝛽 = −0.09, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10, 𝑧 =
−0.90, 𝑝 = .37).


J.5.5   Discussion

Large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT can accurately describe default effects and reference
the relevant literature, presumably because these concepts are well represented in their training
data. Default effects, while often robust, vary considerably in magnitude (61). In the present study,
human participants showed a default effect in the green energy adoption paradigm but not in the
organ donation paradigm. Digital twins predicted a strong default effect in the organ donation
paradigm but no effect in the green energy paradigm.
   This discrepancy may stem from greater representation of the organ donation paradigm in the
LLM’s training data, while our modified green energy options may have diverged from commonly
seen formats. Still, digital twins were able to predict human choices in the green energy paradigm
with 69% accuracy, showing some promise in capturing people’s underlying preferences.




                                                  126
J.6     Digital Certificates for Luxury Consumption

J.6.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Luxury brands face the perpetual problem of balancing exclusivity with growth (62). Diffusion
of products into the marketplace inevitably erodes exclusivity and negatively impacts product and
brand value (63). Recent work has demonstrated that a new technology—digital certification—
reinforces value when luxury products become diffused (64). In this study, we aim to replicate this
pattern with human participants, and test whether their digital twins respond similarly to digital
certification.
    Specifically, we test whether attaching a digital passport to a luxury product that has become
diffused increases its perceived value (i.e., status perceptions) and monetary value (i.e., price
perceptions). Digital passports are a novel Blockchain-based certification system inspired by a
recent European Union regulation to create more transparent and sustainable supply chains for
physical products (65). For example, the Aura Blockchain Collective (a non-profit collective of
major luxury firms) provides digital passports that allow consumers to follow their purchases
through the entire product journey, from the origin of the raw materials to recycling.19


J.6.2   Methods

We opened the study to 600 human participants on Prolific (46.50% female, 53.50% male; 𝑀age =
49.86, 𝑆𝐷 = 14.32). The study was subsequently run on their 600 digital twins, and the final sample
size was 1,200 for our analysis. Participants and their corresponding digital twins were randomly
assigned to one of two conditions in a two-cell (Digital Certification: Digital Passport vs. Control)
between-subjects design (each human and their digital twin were assigned to the same condition).
    All participants were asked to select one of six luxury sweaters: “Here is a selection of 6
sweaters by a luxury brand. Please choose the sweater that you are most interested in.” Digital
twins were given a textual description of each sweater, rather than an image, to enable comparison
between humans and their digital counterparts, who cannot process visual images (Figure 32,
top). The description of each sweater was based on real sweaters designed by Ralph Lauren
  19 “Solutions   - Aura Blockchain Consortium” (n.d.), (accessed February 18, 2025), [available at
https://auraconsortium.com/solutions].



                                                 127
(𝑀price = $531.90; Figure 32, bottom). To avoid potential confounds, the brand was not mentioned.
These six target sweaters were chosen from a set of 20 after an extensive pretest to ensure the
products were equally liked, perceived as high-end, suitable for the scenario (i.e., as an outfit for
going out), and conspicuous. Additional exploratory analyses controlled for participants’ selected
sweater to account for differences across product stimuli (e.g., sweater color, style) that could
influence value perceptions.




                                                128
                       129

Figure 32: Stimuli for Digital Certification Study.
   After choosing a sweater, participants in the digital passport condition read as follows:

      We will ask you a few questions about the luxury sweater you selected. This luxury
      sweater is linked to a permanent digital record available on a public website, showcasing
      the current owner. This allows anyone interested to verify the ownership of your specific
      luxury sweater through this accessible record. Essentially, the digital record serves as
      unequivocal evidence of your luxury sweater’s ownership.

   Participants in the control condition alternatively read: “We will ask you a few questions about
the luxury sweater you selected.” All conditions next featured a scenario in which the luxury
product has become diffused. Specifically, all participants read, “Imagine you decided to purchase
this luxury sweater and style it for your night out, but during your night out you noticed many
other people wearing the same luxury sweater.” Participants in the digital passport condition also
read, “Nevertheless, you know there is a digital record associated with the particular luxury sweater
you are wearing, reassuring your ownership.” Finally, all participants completed a writing task to
reinforce the manipulation: “Please imagine your night out in detail. Briefly describe how you look
and how you would feel wearing this sweater during your night out.”
   Participants then responded to the dependent variables by reporting their perceptions of product
value (“How expensive do you think the sweater is? (Please enter number of $)”) and status
perceptions (“Please answer the following questions. To what extent do you think the sweater is...”;
luxurious, high status, prestigious; 1 = Not at all, 7 = To a great extent; Ward & Dahl, 2014). These
three items were averaged for analysis (𝛼 = .94). We log-normalized the price perception measure
to address skewness (𝜇 = 4.06 > 2; i.e., right-skewed; (66)). Finally, participants reported the extent
to which they were familiar with digital passports (“How familiar are you with digital passports?”;
1 = Very Unfamiliar, 7 = Very Familiar), the perceived difficulty of the task to account for different
prompt lengths across conditions (“How difficult was it to imagine the sweater scenario?”; 1 =
Extremely Easy, 7 = Extremely Difficult), and whether they owned real luxury products (0 = No, 1
= Yes).




                                                 130
J.6.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

We estimated a linear mixed-effects regression with participant as a random effect, log-transformed
price perceptions as the dependent variable, and Participant Type (Human = 0, Digital Twin = 1),
Digital Certification (Control = 0, Digital Passport = 1), and their interaction as predictors. We
found a significant effect of Digital Certification (𝑏 = .25, 𝑆𝐸 = .05, 𝑡 (1190.45) = 4.94, 𝑝 < .001),
a significant effect of Participant Type (𝑏 = .83, 𝑆𝐸 = .05, 𝑡 (597.99) = 16.91, 𝑝 < .001), and a
significant interaction (𝑏 = −0.21, 𝑆𝐸 = .07, 𝑡 (596.99) = −3.08, 𝑝 < .01; Figure 33), indicating
that, at an aggregate level, the digital twins rated price perceptions differently than the humans.
Pairwise comparisons confirmed that, for humans, price perceptions were significantly higher when
their purchase was connected to a digital certification (𝑀 = 5.26, 𝑆𝐸 = .04) compared to no digital
certification (𝑀 = 5.01, 𝑆𝐸 = .04; 𝑡 (1190) = 4.94, 𝑝 < .001). However, for the digital twins,
price perceptions were not significantly different when their purchase was connected to a digital
certification (𝑀 = 5.88, 𝑆𝐸 = .04) compared to no digital certification (𝑀 = 5.84, 𝑆𝐸 = .04;
𝑡 (1190) = 0.73, 𝑝 = .463).




                                                 131
Figure 33: Price Perceptions by Digital Certification for Humans vs. Twins. NOTE: Error bars
indicate ±1 standard error of the estimated marginal means.


   We next estimated a linear mixed-effects regression with participant as a random effect, status
perceptions as the dependent variable, and Participant Type (Human = 0, Digital Twin = 1), Digital
Certification (Control = 0, Digital Passport = 1), and their interaction as predictors. We found a non-
significant effect of Digital Certification (𝑏 = 0.14, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1175.69) = 1.44; 𝑝 = .151), along
with a significant effect of Participant Type (𝑏 = 0.19, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09; 𝑡 (597.99) = 2.06; 𝑝 = .040)
and a significant interaction (𝑏 = −0.55, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.13; 𝑡 (597.99) = −4.24; 𝑝 < .001; Figure 34),
indicating that, at an aggregate level, the digital twins rated status perceptions differently than the
humans. Pairwise comparisons confirmed that, for humans, status perceptions were marginally
higher when their purchase was connected to a digital certification (𝑀 = 4.81, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07)
compared to no digital certification (𝑀 = 4.66, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (1176) = 1.44; 𝑝 = .150). However,
for the digital twins, status perceptions were significantly lower when their purchase was connected
to a digital certification (𝑀 = 4.44, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07) compared to no digital certification (𝑀 = 4.85,


                                                 132
𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (1176) = −4.16; 𝑝 < .001).




Figure 34: Status Perceptions by Digital Certification for Humans vs. Twins. NOTE: Error bars
indicate ±1 standard error of the estimated marginal means.


J.6.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

Although not part of our pre-registered plan, we ran two additional linear mixed-effects regressions
on log-transformed price perceptions and status perceptions, controlling for the specific product
selected by the participant, number of words generated in the imagination prompt, participants’
familiarity with digital passports, difficulty of imagining the scenario, and personal ownership of
luxury products. Before running these regressions, we examined differences between humans and
their digital twins on each of these variables.
   We first tested whether humans and their twins differed in the sweaters they selected. The
results indicated weak but statistically significant agreement between twins and humans (𝜅 = .166,
𝑝 < .001). A chi-squared test of independence also revealed a significant and positive association
between human and twin sweater choices (𝜒2 (1, 𝑁 = 1200) = 297.4, 𝑝 < .001). Breaking down

                                                  133
choice by the gender association of the sweaters, digital twins tended to mirror their human
counterparts: when humans selected one of the three feminine sweaters, their twins also selected a
feminine sweater 86.31% of the time (𝜒2 (1, 𝑁 = 241) = 125.63, 𝑝 < .001); when humans selected
one of the three masculine sweaters, their twins chose a masculine sweater 85.24% of the time
(𝜒2 (1, 𝑁 = 359) = 176.89, 𝑝 < .001).
   We next checked whether all participants wrote roughly an equal number of words (log-
corrected) between conditions. While the number of words generated did not differ between
conditions for humans (𝑀Digital Passport = 3.54 vs. 𝑀Control = 3.47; 𝐹 (1, 598) = 1.70, 𝑝 = .20,
𝑑 = .11), the digital twins generated more words in the Digital Passport condition (𝑀 = 4.42)
compared to the Control (𝑀 = 4.36; 𝐹 (1, 598) = 66.92, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = .67). Additionally, the
digital twins generated more text (𝑀 = 4.42) compared to their human counterparts (𝑀 = 3.50;
𝐹 (1, 599) = 1305.28, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 1.47).
   We then tested for perceived familiarity with digital passports. Across humans and twins, there
were no differences in perceived familiarity among participants in the Digital Passport condition
(𝑀 = 2.40) compared to the Control condition (𝑀 = 2.36; 𝐹 (1, 1198) = 0.20, 𝑝 = .65, 𝑑 = .03).
Human participants, however, reported being more familiar with digital passports (𝑀 = 2.68)
compared to twins (𝑀 = 2.08; 𝐹 (1, 599) = 74.54, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.35).
   We then tested for differences in difficulty of imagining the scenario between conditions. Human
participants in the Digital Passport condition found the imagination task more difficult (𝑀 = 2.68)
than in the Control condition (𝑀 = 2.03; 𝐹 (1, 598) = 32.70, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.47). Digital twins
also found the imagination task more difficult in the Digital Passport condition (𝑀 = 2.59) than
in the Control condition (𝑀 = 2.31; 𝐹 (1, 598) = 22.32, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.39). There were no
differences in difficulty of imagining the tasks between humans (𝑀 = 2.35) and twins (𝑀 = 2.45;
𝐹 (1, 1198) = 2.26, 𝑝 = .13, 𝑑 = 0.09).
   We finally tested for differences in reported ownership of luxury products. Across humans and
twins, there were no differences in luxury product ownership among participants in the Digital
Passport condition (40.4%) compared to the Control condition (39.3%; 𝜒2 (1) = 0.12, 𝑝 = .73).
Human participants, however, reported higher luxury ownership (53.8%) compared to their digital
twins (25.8%; 𝜒2 (1) = 96.97, 𝑝 < .001).
   To test whether our findings persist when controlling for these differences, we ran a linear


                                               134
mixed-effects regression with participant as a random effect, log-normalized perceived price as
the dependent variable, and Participant Type (Human = 0, Digital Twin = 1), Digital Certification
(Control = 0, Digital Passport = 1), and their interaction as predictors, controlling for the product
participants selected, as well as familiarity with digital passports, difficulty of imagination, and
ownership of luxury products. We found a significant effect of familiarity (𝑏 = 0.05, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.01;
𝑡 (1190.90) = 3.48, 𝑝 < .001) and luxury product ownership (𝑏 = 0.20, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.04; 𝑡 (1170.09) =
5.10, 𝑝 < .001), but a non-significant effect of product choice (𝑏 = 0.02, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.01; 𝑡 (1190.85) =
1.48, 𝑝 = .14) and difficulty of imagination (𝑏 = −0.02, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.02; 𝑡 (1190.82) = −1.51, 𝑝 = .13).
Nevertheless, the analysis revealed a significant effect of Digital Certification (𝑏 = 0.28, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05;
𝑡 (1189.85) = 5.53, 𝑝 < .001) and a significant effect of Participant Type (𝑏 = 0.96, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05;
𝑡 (726.87) = 17.88, 𝑝 < .001), qualified by a significant interaction between Digital Certification
and Participant Type (𝑏 = −0.25, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (603.74) = −3.66, 𝑝 < .001).
   Next, we ran a linear mixed-effects regression with participant as a random effect, status
perceptions as the dependent variable, and Participant Type (Human = 0, Digital Twin = 1),
Digital Certification (Control = 0, Digital Passport = 1), and their interaction as predictors, again
controlling for the product participants selected, as well as familiarity with digital passports,
difficulty of imagination, and ownership of luxury products. We found a significant effect of
familiarity (𝑏 = 0.07, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.03; 𝑡 (1185.69) = 2.43, 𝑝 = .02) and luxury product ownership
(𝑏 = 0.46, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08; 𝑡 (1180.77) = 6.09, 𝑝 < .001), but a non-significant effect of product choice
(𝑏 = −0.03, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.02; 𝑡 (1185.33) = −1.43, 𝑝 = .15) and difficulty of imagination (𝑏 = −0.02,
𝑆𝐸 = 0.03; 𝑡 (1191.82) = −0.70, 𝑝 = .48). Nevertheless, the analysis revealed a marginal effect
of Digital Certification (𝑏 = 0.17, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1183.86) = 1.72, 𝑝 = .08) and a significant
effect of Participant Type (𝑏 = 0.34, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (722.27) = 3.30, 𝑝 < .01), qualified by a
significant interaction between Digital Certification and Participant Type (𝑏 = −0.59, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.13;
𝑡 (598.73) = −4.51, 𝑝 < .001).
   These additional analyses strengthen our confidence that the effects are robust across individual
product choice, familiarity with the digital certification context (i.e., digital passports), ease of
completing the task, and luxury product ownership.




                                                 135
J.6.5   Discussion

These findings demonstrate that providing digital certification via a digital passport increases the
value perception of a diffused luxury product for humans, consistent with existing research (64).
Digital twins’ value perceptions, however, are not impacted by the inclusion of a digital passport.
The findings have important implications for our understanding of when digital twins will not act
as their human counterparts.
   In this study, the divergence may stem from the psychological reassurance of product authenticity
that certification provides to human consumers (64), which digital twins cannot fully internalize.
This highlights a potential blind spot in current AI models: a limited ability to model symbolic
consumption, ownership signaling, or status restoration processes. More broadly, these findings call
for caution when relying on digital twins to simulate human judgments in domains involving identity
and social perception—especially in luxury or prestige-based contexts. Future work should explore
how these divergences arise and whether digital twins can be improved to better simulate symbolic
inference processes, or whether some aspects of human value perception are fundamentally non-
transferrable.




                                                136
J.7     Fees Accuracy

J.7.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Hidden fees and surcharges are a routine but often resented aspect of modern commerce. Whether
booking a hotel, ordering food delivery, or using a credit card bill, consumers frequently encounter
extra, often unexpected charges—like resort fees, service fees, foreign transaction fees, or order
processing fees—added on top of the advertised base price. These fees are often disclosed late in
the transaction, hindering consumers’ ability to estimate total costs or compare options, and are
often described using obtuse language, obscuring understanding of why the fees are assessed. As
a result, they have attracted growing scrutiny from consumer advocates and regulators. In recent
years, a bipartisan group of regulators in the United States and other countries have advocated for
stronger pricing transparency and restrictions on the delayed disclosure of mandatory charges. In
2022, the Biden-Harris administration labeled these “junk fees,” defined as “fees designed either to
confuse or deceive consumers or to take advantage of lock-in or other forms of situational market
power” (67).
   Against this policy backdrop, we explore how consumers think about these fees —how knowl-
edgeable they are on what these fees represent, how fair they perceive them to be, and how supportive
they are of government regulation regarding firms’ use of such fees. We also examine whether large
language models (LLMs), acting as digital twins, can replicate their human counterparts in these
domains.
   Specifically, we ask the following questions. First, do digital twins accurately replicate human
knowledge of pricing fees? Second, do they mirror human judgment about fairness? Third, do they
match human attitudes toward regulation?


J.7.2   Methods

We recruited 400 U.S. participants from Prolific (48% female; median age group = 50–64) to
complete an online survey assessing their knowledge and attitudes toward 19 different fees assessed
across seven industries (e.g., hospitality, healthcare, rental housing). Each participant evaluated one
randomly assigned fee from six of the seven industries. See Table 11 for the full list of industries
and fees.


                                                 137
Industry              Fee                       Definition

Hotels                Resort fee                A mandatory fee for a group of services, such as pool use,
                                                gym access, towel services, Wi-Fi, newspapers, shuttle ser-
                                                vice, daily parking, etc.
                      Destination fee           A mandatory fee for a group of services, such as pool use,
                                                gym access, towel services, Wi-Fi, newspapers, shuttle ser-
                                                vice, daily parking, etc.
                      Restocking fee            A fee charged by hotels for using the mini-fridge to store
                                                personal items.
Car Rentals           Vehicle      licensing    A fee charged by rental car companies to offset costs associ-
                      fee                       ated with vehicle registration, licensing, and related taxes.
                      Toll transponder fee      A daily fee assessed if a toll transponder is used during
                                                every day of the rental to pass quickly through toll booths.
                      Concession recov-         A fee charged by rental car companies to customers to re-
                      ery fee                   cover costs associated with operating at specific locations,
                                                such as airports.
                      Frequent          trav-   A fee for accumulating miles or points through credit card,
                      eler         program      airline, or other rewards programs.
                      surcharge/excise
                      tax
Ticket Processing     Delivery fee              A fee for delivering tickets, whether physical or electronic.
                      Order      processing     A fee to cover costs associated with processing and com-
                      fee                       pleting ticket purchases.
                      Facility charge           A fee to cover costs associated with hosting an event.
Food       Delivery   Service fee               A fee to operate the food delivery app platform.
Apps
                      Express fee               A fee for prioritizing the matching process for delivery
                                                services.




                                                 138
 Industry               Fee                     Definition

                        Regulatory        re-   A fee to offset the impact of regulations on firms.
                        sponse fee
 Apartment Rentals      Valet trash fee         A fee for trash and recycling collection services.
                        Move-in fee             A non-refundable fee to cover move-in and administrative
                                                costs, such as record updates, lock changes, and unit prepa-
                                                ration.
                        Amenity fee             A recurring fee that covers additional services and ameni-
                                                ties, such as pools, gyms, parking, or other building facili-
                                                ties.
 Health Care            Hospital facility fee   A fee charged by a private medical practice owned by a
                                                hospital to cover the hospital’s operational and maintenance
                                                costs, including equipment, staff, and utilities.
 Credit Cards           Foreign transaction     A fee for purchases or transactions in a foreign currency to
                        fee                     cover conversion and international processing costs.
                        Balance transfer fee    A percentage fee that covers debt transfers from one credit
                                                card to another.

                      Table 11: Industries, Fees, and Definitions Used in the Sur-
                      vey.



   For each fee, we assessed the following. First, we assessed participants’ objective knowledge by
asking them to select the best definition of a fee from four options (e.g., “Which of the following
do you think best represents what a resort fee is assessed for?”). We coded responses as 1 if correct
and 0 if incorrect. We then averaged participants’ responses across the six fees they evaluated to
create an overall accuracy score. Immediately after responding, participants were informed whether
their answer was correct and were shown the correct definition. Second, we assessed participants’
familiarity with each fee. Specifically, participants indicated whether they had previously heard
of each fee (e.g., they responded to questions like “Have you ever heard of a resort fee before
seeing it in this survey?”). These items capture prior experience and are part of a separate project

                                                  139
and were not pre-registered. Third, we assessed participants’ fairness perceptions. Participants
rated how fair they considered each fee (e.g., they responded to questions like “How fair do you
think it is for hotels to charge for a resort fee?”) on a 7-point scale (1 = Very unfair; 7 = Very
fair). We then averaged participants’ responses across the six fees they evaluated to create an
overall fairness rating. Finally, we assessed participants’ attitudes regarding policy. Specifically,
after completing the fee evaluations, participants responded to several items about their general
attitudes toward pricing practices and regulation. These included two pre-registered items: “Should
pricing practices be regulated by the government?” rated on a 7-point scale (1 = Strongly oppose
regulation; 7 = Strongly support regulation), and “How likely would you be to support government
regulation that bans firms from separating out mandatory fees from base prices?” rated on a 7-point
scale (1 = Very unlikely; 7 = Very likely). Responses to these two items were highly correlated
(𝑟 = .72), so we averaged them to create a composite measure of support for regulation.
      Each participant’s responses were paired with those of an LLM-generated digital twin prompted
to respond as that individual would.


J.7.3    Results - Pre-registered Analyses

Knowledge Accuracy. Digital twins dramatically outperformed human participants in identifying
correct definitions of fees, based on a paired 𝑡-test (𝑡 (399) = 45.89, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 3.26). Humans
answered 51.75% of fee definition questions correctly (SD = 20.87%), while digital twins answered
99.88% correctly (SD = 1.86%).
      Fairness. Despite the accuracy gap, average fairness ratings were virtually identical. Both human
participants (𝑀 = 3.28, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.24), and their digital twins (𝑀 = 3.27, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.62) rated the fees
as moderately unfair, and their ratings did not significantly differ based on a paired-sample 𝑡-test
(𝑡 (399) = 0.14, 𝑝 = .886, 𝑑 = 0.01). Table 12 reports fee-specific fairness comparisons.

Fee                                Human         M Twins M (SD)       Paired 𝑡-test
                                   (SD)

Hotel Fees
Resort Fee                         3.04 (1.80)      2.95 (0.81)       𝑡 (131) = 0.53, 𝑝 = .596, 𝑑 = 0.06
Destination Fee                    2.93 (1.68)      3.12 (0.81)       𝑡 (133) = 1.24, 𝑝 = .215, 𝑑 = 0.15


                                                   140
Fee                              Human         M Twins M (SD)     Paired 𝑡-test
                                 (SD)

Restocking Fee                   2.29 (1.61)        2.23 (0.50)   𝑡 (133) = 0.44, 𝑝 = .660, 𝑑 = 0.05
Car Rental Fees
Vehicle Licensing Fee            3.44 (1.79)        3.71 (0.86)   𝑡 (100) = 1.46, 𝑝 = .149, 𝑑 = 0.20
Toll Transponder Fee             4.15 (1.83)        3.27 (0.83)   𝑡 (99) = 4.44, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.62
Concession Recovery Fee          3.29 (1.70)        3.34 (0.81)   𝑡 (98) = 0.29, 𝑝 = .769, 𝑑 = 0.04
Frequent Traveler Program 2.43 (1.50)               2.67 (0.67)   𝑡 (99) = 1.65, 𝑝 = .101, 𝑑 = 0.20
Surcharge/Excise Tax
Ticket Processing Fees
Delivery Fee                     2.56 (1.56)        3.61 (0.91)   𝑡 (130) = 7.05, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.82
Order Processing Fee             3.05 (1.85)        3.48 (0.87)   𝑡 (134) = 2.83, 𝑝 = .005, 𝑑 = 0.28
Facility Charge                  3.36 (1.80)        3.51 (0.82)   𝑡 (133) = 0.93, 𝑝 = .355, 𝑑 = 0.10
Food Delivery App Fees
Service Fee                      3.91 (1.78)        3.86 (0.77)   𝑡 (133) = 0.33, 𝑝 = .744, 𝑑 = 0.04
Express Fee                      3.64 (1.77)        3.00 (0.76)   𝑡 (132) = 4.10, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.46
Regulatory Response Fee          2.69 (1.66)        2.59 (0.57)   𝑡 (132) = 0.72, 𝑝 = .472, 𝑑 = 0.08
Apartment Rental Fees
Valet Trash Fee                  3.66 (1.88)        3.36 (0.96)   𝑡 (133) = 1.73, 𝑝 = .086, 𝑑 = 0.20
Move-In Fee                      3.10 (1.71)        3.58 (0.83)   𝑡 (133) = 2.89, 𝑝 = .004, 𝑑 = 0.36
Amenity Fee                      3.70 (1.66)        3.55 (0.80)   𝑡 (131) = 1.00, 𝑝 = .320, 𝑑 = 0.11
Health Care Fees
Hospital Facility Fee            3.28 (1.94)        2.81 (0.79)   𝑡 (133) = 2.80, 𝑝 = .006, 𝑑 = 0.30
Credit Card Fees
Foreign Transaction Fee          4.30 (1.69)        3.86 (0.93)   𝑡 (131) = 2.76, 𝑝 = .007, 𝑑 = 0.33
Balance Transfer Fee             3.56 (1.87)        3.63 (0.78)   𝑡 (133) = 0.46, 𝑝 = .643, 𝑑 = 0.05

                         Table 12: Per-Fee Fairness Comparisons Between Human
                         and AI (paired-samples).




                                                 141
   We also compared the variation in fairness judgments between humans and digital twins.
Humans expressed significantly more variation in their fairness ratings than did their digital twins,
based on a Levene’s test (𝐹 (1, 798) = 180.48, 𝑝 < .001).
   Policy Attitudes. We regressed support for regulation on participants’ ideology (mean-centered,
1 = very liberal to 5 = very conservative), source (Human vs. AI), and their interaction. The main
effect of political ideology was significant (𝑏 = −0.44, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.06, 𝑡 (796) = −7.78, 𝑝 < .001),
such that more conservative participants expressed lower support for regulation. The main effect of
source was also significant (𝑏 = 0.44, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09, 𝑡 (796) = 4.69, 𝑝 < .001), with AI twins show-
ing greater support for regulation than their human counterparts. Finally, the interaction between
political ideology and source was significant (𝑏 = −0.53, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.08, 𝑡 (796) = −6.67, 𝑝 < .001),
demonstrating that the ideology effect was stronger for the digital twins than their human counter-
parts (see Figure 35).




 Figure 35: Support for Regulation as a Function of Political Ideology and Participant Source.




                                                142
J.7.4   Discussion

Our findings reveal a striking contrast: digital twins excel at factual knowledge (i.e., knowledge
of fee definitions) and fall short of mimicking the error-prone, heterogeneous reasoning of human
consumers. This limitation underscores a critical boundary in using LLMs as behavioral research
surrogates: when tasks depend on limited knowledge, ambiguity, or lived experiences, digital twins
may produce unrealistically accurate responses.
   In contrast to the large difference in accuracy, on fairness judgments, digital twins closely
mirrored the average human response, but exhibited narrower variance. This suggests that while
LLMs can approximate central tendencies, they may underrepresent the subjective diversity of
human opinion.
   In the domain of policy attitudes, digital twins again tracked human performance. For both
groups, conservatism was correlated with less support for pricing regulation, replicating prior work
on ideological influences in policy attitudes (e.g., (68)). However, digital twins exhibited exag-
gerated ideological consistency with a stronger negative association between conservatism and
regulation support than human participants. This likely reflects LLM’s reliance on dominant asso-
ciations in their training data (e.g., conservatism = free-market values), whereas human responses
may incorporate more contextual nuance.
   Together, these results offer promise and caution. The results suggest that LLMs can simulate
certain aspects of consumer judgment, but may misrepresent human variability and error, especially
when tasks require subjective or uncertain reasoning. Because LLMs are trained to prioritize factual
accuracy and statistical associations from vast textual corpora, they often struggle to suppress correct
information, even when explicitly instructed to simulate human errors, misconceptions, or gaps in
knowledge.




                                                  143
J.8     Heterogeneous Story Beliefs

J.8.1    Main Questions/Hypotheses

When reading a book and predicting the emotion (valence and arousal) of the next chapter based
on the previous chapter, what is the correlation between the expected valence and expected arousal
from humans vs. their digital twins (LLMs)?
   We hypothesize that LLM-based digital twins can meaningfully simulate human expectations
about emotional trajectories in narrative contexts, as measured by correlations between human and
LLM predictions of valence and arousal for upcoming story content.


J.8.2    Methods

250 participants were recruited via Prolific with stratified sampling to ensure equal representa-
tion across racial groups (50 participants each from White, Black, Hispanic, Asian, and Other
categories), and their digital twins.
   Participants read chapters from 16 possible stories, with each participant randomly assigned to
read 2 stories. Each story consisted of two chapters. Participants made predictions after reading
each chapter: after Chapter 1 (predicting Chapter 2) and after Chapter 2 (predicting what would
come next), resulting in 4 prediction points per participant.
   Primary Dependent Variables:

   1. Human valence expectation: Participants assigned probabilities to five valence levels for the
        next chapter:

           • Very negative (1) to Very positive (5)

           • Question: ”Based on the chapter you just read, what do you think is the likelihood
             that the text of the next chapter will be very negative or very positive? Please assign a
             percentage to each. The total must sum to 100%.”

   2. Human arousal expectation: Participants assigned probabilities to five arousal levels for the
        next chapter:

           • Very low energy (1) to Very high energy (5)

                                                 144
          • Question: ”Based on the chapter you just read, what do you think is the likelihood that
            the text of the next chapter will be very low energy or very high energy? Please assign
            a percentage to each. The total must sum to 100%.”

   From these probability distributions, we calculated expected values to create continuous mea-
sures of expected valence and arousal.


J.8.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

The analysis included all prediction points (predictions made after both Chapter 1 and Chapter 2
of each story):

   1. Valence Expectations:

        (a) Pearson correlation: 𝑟 = 0.546 [95% CI: 0.501, 0.588]

        (b) Statistical significance: 𝑡 (1002) = 20.65, 𝑝 < .001

   2. Arousal Expectations:

        (a) Pearson correlation: 𝑟 = 0.384 [95% CI: 0.330, 0.436]

        (b) Statistical significance: 𝑡 (1002) = 13.17, 𝑝 < .001

   Both correlations were statistically significant at 𝑝 < .001, indicating that LLM predictions are
significantly associated with human expectations for both valence and arousal across all chapter
transitions. The moderate positive correlations suggest meaningful alignment between human and
LLM story belief patterns.


J.8.4   Discussion

This study provides evidence that LLM-based digital twins can meaningfully simulate human
emotional expectations in narrative contexts. The significant positive correlations for both valence
(𝑟 = 0.416) and arousal (𝑟 = 0.420) support our hypothesis that LLMs can capture how humans
predict emotional trajectories in stories.



                                                145
J.9     Hiring Algorithms

J.9.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Digital twins, or AI agents trained to simulate individual behaviors, have the potential to reshape
how job seekers and employers interact. From the candidate side, digital twins can help streamline
the job search process by identifying roles aligned with the job seeker’s preferences, tailoring job
application materials, and even interacting with recruiters on the job seeker’s behalf. For firms,
digital twins enable the screening of candidates according to the firm’s preferences, the simulation of
candidate responses to different human resource policies, and even candidate outreach and outbound
recruiting efforts. The advent of digital twins, and a growing ecosystem of start-ups offering such
services, may thus fundamentally reshape the dynamics of hiring, and employee-employer matching
more generally.
   Despite the growing interest in digital twins, we lack evidence of their effectiveness to capture
workplace preferences. While digital twins have shown promise in modeling preferences in more
structured domains, there are unique challenges in the workplace context. For example, workplace
preferences are multi-dimensional and candidates must weigh trade-offs between attributes like
compensation, skill development, flexibility, and culture. Moreover, workplace preferences are
shaped by social context and may vary over time. These features call into question the extent to
which current digital twins can accurately represent how employees and firms navigate the matching
process.
   In this sub-study, we examine the ability of digital twins to predict job candidate preferences
over workplace attributes using a two-stage study. In the first stage, we elicit the stated preferences
of job candidates over a range of workplace characteristics, including work-life balance, career
development, and company culture. We then ask each participant’s digital twin to report their
preferences over the same attributes. By comparing the stated and simulated preferences, we can
understand how well digital twins predict the stated preferences of their human counterparts. In the
second stage, we use a within-subjects experiment where participants evaluate four job postings.
Our manipulation here changes whether the firm’s hiring is done by algorithms or humans, and we
randomly assign two of the four job postings to have AI recruiters. Both humans and their digital
twins evaluate each of the four job postings on eight key attributes, including transparency, fairness,


                                                 146
and likelihood of applying. This design thus allows us to understand the efficacy of digital twins in
predicting workplace preferences and experiments in the HR domain.


J.9.2   Methods

We run a two-stage study to examine these questions. We outline these stages in Figure 36. Both
humans and their digital twins completed the study in the same order.




                                 Figure 36: Outline of the study.


   The first stage of our study collects data on respondent workplace preferences. We asked
respondents a total of eight questions across four distinct themes related to workplace preferences.
These themes included:

    • Sustainability and ESG practices

         – ”How important is it to you that your employer actively invests in environmental sus-
           tainability (e.g., reducing carbon emissions, minimizing waste)?”

         – ”Would you prefer to work at a company that is outspoken about social and political
           issues, or one that remains neutral?”

    • Work-life balance and flexibility

         – ”How likely are you to accept a job that requires you to be in the office five days a
           week?”




                                                147
           – ”Which of the following is more important to you when choosing a job? Where options
              included: (i) A flexible schedule that allows me to manage personal responsibilities;
              (ii) Clear boundaries between work and personal time, (iii) Strict 9-to-5 hours (iv) A
              predictable, fixed schedule20

     • Firm prestige & career development

           – ”How much do you value opportunities for formal training and upskilling in your current
              or future role?”

           – ”Imagine two job offers: one from a prestigious company with a competitive culture,
              and one from a lesser-known company with a collaborative, supportive environment.
              Which would you choose?”21

     • Culture, values, and leadership

           – ”How important is it that your company’s leadership communicates transparently about
              the firm’s goals and challenges?”

           – ”How much do you care about your company’s stated mission and values aligning with
              your personal beliefs?”

    We collect these measures for both human participants and their digital twins. Thus for each
participant, we have their stated preference regarding (i) sustainability & ESG practices; (ii) work-
life balance and flexibility; (iii) firm prestige and career development; and (iv) culture and values.
We also have the corresponding responses from the digital twins, allowing us to compare how well
LLMs can predict job candidate preferences in the hiring process.
  20 To construct the index measuring respondents’ preferences for flexible work–life balance arrangements, we ordered

the four response options from least to most flexible as follows: (1) Strict 9–5 hours, (2) Predictable, fixed schedule,
(3) Clear boundaries between work and personal time, and (4) Flexible schedule that allows me to manage personal
responsibilities. This index captures increasing preference for autonomy in managing one’s work schedule.
   21 To construct the index for collaborative culture preference, we ordered the responses to reflect increasing preference

for collaborative environments: (1) Prestigious, (2) Depends on compensation, (3) Not sure, and (4) Collaborative. This
index captures respondents’ orientation toward workplace culture, with higher scores indicating stronger preferences
for collaboration over prestige or ambiguity.


                                                           148
     The second stage of our study uses an experiment with within-subjects variation to understand
how candidates respond to algorithms in the hiring process. In this part, participants evaluate
hiring policies from the perspective of a job seeker. We present participants with four different
job postings, which display a position overview, the responsibilities, benefits, and hiring policy
(See Figure 37 for an example). Our randomization manipulates whether hiring uses either human
resume screeners or algorithmic ones. Following each posting, participants evaluated the job on
eight questions (displayed in Table 13 below), using a 7-point Likert scale from strongly disagree
to strongly agree.

     Job Title: Entry Level Data Analyst

     Position Overview: As an Entry Level Data Analyst, you will play a pivotal role in analyz-
     ing complex financial data, developing valuable insights, and supporting decision-making
     processes within our firm.

     Responsibilities: The responsibilities for this position include collecting, cleaning, and ma-
     nipulating large datasets to extract meaningful insights that support business objectives.

     Benefits: Our benefits include a competitive salary commensurate with experience, health,
     dental, and vision insurance, and a collaborative and inclusive work environment.

     Hiring Policy: Our hiring team will create insights on how your candidate information
     matches the requirements of the role. Following this initial screening, our hiring team will
     conduct in-person interviews with selected candidates.


                                   Figure 37: Sample Job Posting.



 #        Question                                                                 Theme

 1        I would apply for this position.                                         Likelihood of applying
 2        I would be hired for this position.                                      Likelihood of receiving
                                                                                   offer




                                                  149
 #       Question                                                                  Theme

 3       I will receive clear and transparent communication throughout the Transparency
         hiring process.
 4       The firm’s hiring policies are fair and unbiased.                         Fairness
 5       The hiring process will move at a reasonable pace and ensure a timely Efficiency and timeli-
         decision-making process.                                                  ness
 6       The hiring process will give me a clear understanding of the job Information
         requirements, expectations, and the company culture.
 7       The hiring process will effectively identify top job applicants for the Identifies top talent
         position.
 8       The firm’s hiring process suggests the firm fosters a high degree of Sociality
         social interaction.

                               Table 13: Questions regarding job postings.




J.9.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

We first examine whether digital twins can accurately predict human workplace preferences using
two methods. First, we run paired t-tests to test whether on average the twin outcomes equal the
actual human outcomes. Second, we use regression to estimate the size and direction of the bias.
     Table 14 displays the results of the paired t-tests across all of our questions. The top panel
contains the outcomes from the first phase of the study, while the bottom panel displays them from
the second phase of the study. Column 1 displays the average human response while column 2
displays the average digital twin response. Column 3 displays the average difference in responses
for the digital twin versus the human, with the corresponding t-test p-value in column 4. Lastly,
column 5 displays the sample size for each group.
     The results in Table 14 indicate that, on average, the outcomes generated by digital twins are
statistically different from those generated by humans. Across the eight workplace preferences in
phase 1 of the study (Panel A of Table 14), we only find evidence of no differences between the
two for workplace flexibility preferences. For the other categories, we find statistically significant


                                                 150
differences between the two. For most, the digital twins over-estimate human preferences for
workplace attributes (for example, sustainability, ESG practices, collaboration, and transparency in
leadership). Meanwhile, the digital twins under-estimate their human counterparts’ preferences for
career development opportunities.
   We find qualitatively similar results for the second phase of the study, which we display in Panel
B of Table 14. We find statistically significant differences across all outcomes here. Like before,
the digital twins over-estimate some responses (for example, the likelihood of being hired for the
position) and under-estimate others (the firm’s degree of social interaction, and receiving clear
information regarding job requirements, expectations, and company culture).

 Panel A: Phase 1 Outcomes

                                                Average            Difference   T-test
                                   Human            Digital Twin   DT - H       p-value      N
 Outcomes                          (1)                     (2)     (3)          (4)          (5)

 Sustainability                    2.88                   3.45     0.57         0.00         999
 ESG Practices                     3.30                   3.67     0.37         0.00         999
 Work Life Balance                 3.36                   3.33     -0.03        0.40         999
 Flexibility                       2.97                   2.95     -0.02        0.70         999
 Collaboration over prestige       2.98                   3.65     0.67         0.00         999
 Career Development                3.67                   3.56     -0.11        0.01         999
 Transparent Leadership            3.83                   4.43     0.60         0.00         999
 Culture & Values                  3.39                   3.54     0.15         0.00         999

 Panel B: Phase 2 Outcomes

                                     Human          Digital        DT - H       p-value      N
                                                    Twin
 Outcomes                                 (1)       (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)

 I would apply for this position         3.34       3.48           0.14         0.00         999
 I would be hired for this posi-         3.46       4.22           0.76         0.00         999
 tion


                                                   151
 I will receive clear and trans-      4.89      4.79             -0.10        0.00          999
 parent communication
 The firm’s hiring policies are       4.88      4.59             -0.29        0.00          999
 fair and unbiased
 The hiring process will move         5.01      4.55             -0.46        0.00          999
 at a reasonable pace
 The hiring process will give         5.20      4.70             -0.50        0.00          999
 me a clear understanding
 The hiring process will effec-       5.05      4.60             -0.45        0.00          999
 tively identify top applicants
 The firm’s hiring process sug-       4.61      4.05             -0.56        0.00          999
 gests strong social interaction

                     Table 14: Comparison of human versus digital twin responses
                     using t-tests.



   The regression tests of Hypothesis 1 lead to similar takeaways. In Table 15, we present the
results of a regression of the human response on the twin’s response with robust standard errors.
Columns 1 and 2 display the coefficient and standard error on the twin’s response, respectively.
Column 3 displays the 𝑝-value from a test of whether the coefficient on the twin response equals
one. The corresponding null hypothesis is that digital twins can perfectly predict human responses
(i.e., 𝛽 = 1). As the table illustrates, however, we can reject the null across all of our outcomes.
Thus, while the digital twins can predict workplace preferences for some participants, on average
they struggle in this domain.

 Panel A: Phase 1 Outcomes

 Outcomes                                                 𝛽 (1)             Std. Err. (2)    p-value (3)

 Sustainability                                           0.68              0.02             0.00
 ESG Practices                                            0.55              0.02             0.00
 Work Life Balance                                        0.11              0.03             0.00


                                                152
 Flexibility                                              0.14              0.03             0.00
 Collaboration over prestige                              0.12              0.04             0.00
 Career Development                                       0.32              0.04             0.00
 Transparent Leadership                                   0.45              0.05             0.00
 Culture & Values                                         0.46              0.04             0.00

 Panel B: Phase 2 Outcomes

 Outcomes                                                 𝛽 (1)             Std. Err. (2)    p-value (3)

 Apply                                                    0.70              0.12             0.08
 Hired                                                    0.27              0.06             0.00
 Communication                                            0.39              0.07             0.00
 Unbiased hiring policies                                 0.41              0.06             0.00
 Timely decision-making                                   0.38              0.06             0.00
 Clear information                                        0.39              0.07             0.00
 Identify top applicants                                  0.39              0.07             0.00
 High degree of sociality                                 0.04              0.04             0.00

                        Table 15: Comparison of human versus digital twin responses
                        using regression.



   In our pre-analysis plan, we were also interested in whether digital twins can better predict
outcomes for various demographic groups. We focused specifically on differences by gender, age,
and race. For this analysis, we used the 𝑡-test strategy described above. We conducted a 𝑡-test for
each specific subsample and report the 𝑝-values in Table 16. The last row of the table counts
the number of times we can reject the null using a cut-off of 𝑝 < .05. In other words, this
row calculates the number of outcomes for the given subgroup where digital twin responses are
statistically indistinguishable from human responses. Our results provide suggestive evidence that
digital twins do better at predicting outcomes for women versus men, as we can reject the null of
no differences between the human and twin responses for three outcomes for women (versus two
for men). Similarly, the twins seem to do better for older respondents versus younger ones. Overall,


                                                153
however, the differences across subgroups are quite limited.

                                    Gender                 Race                               Age

 Outcomes                    Female    Male       White (3)    Non-        18–29      30–49      50–64   65+ (8)
                             (1)       (2)                     White       (5)        (6)        (7)
                                                               (4)

 Sustainability              0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00    0.00
 ESG Practices               0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00    0.00
 Work Life Balance           0.33      0.80       0.00         0.00        0.05       0.02       0.21    0.73
 Flexibility                 0.83      0.74       0.12         0.00        0.19       0.37       0.00    0.41
 Collaboration               0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00    0.00
 Career Development          0.17      0.01       0.03         0.10        0.00       0.00       0.25    0.07
 Transparent Leadership      0.00      0.00       0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00    0.00
 Culture & Values            0.00      0.01       0.00         0.01        0.00       0.03       0.00    0.00

                           Table 16: Comparison of human versus digital twin responses
                           using t-tests, by subgroup.



   We next examine whether experimentation on the digital twins can uncover the true treatment
effect in the human sample. Although the previous results show that digital twins responses are
biased across workplace attributes, valid causal inference may still be possible. For example, if the
digital twins over-estimate the responses from all participants, estimation using the digital twins
may still uncover the true average treatment effect in the human population if this bias is constant
across treatment arms.
   Our experimental manipulation is the use of algorithms in a firm’s hiring policy. Each participant
saw four job postings, where we randomly assigned two to use hiring algorithms (vs human
screeners). For our estimation here, we regress our outcomes on a binary indicator for whether the
job included a hiring algorithm, participant fixed effects, and job-type fixed effects. We do so for
both our human sample and our digital twins sample, and plot the results in Figure 38. Moreover,
we use a stacked regression to compare the treatment effects from our human vs digital twin


                                                154
sample. For this, we append the human and digital twin samples and create a binary indicator for
the twin sample. We then regress each outcome on an indicator for the hiring algorithm condition,
an indicator for the twin sample, and an interaction between the two. The interaction captures the
extent to which the treatment effect in the twin sample is different from the effect in the human
sample. We display these results in Table 17.
   The results reveal that experimentation on digital twins can uncover unbiased treatment effects
even in scenarios where digital twins struggle to predict workplace preferences. For example, the
digital twins accurately recover the treatment effect from the human sample when examining how
hiring algorithms impact the likelihood of applying, being hired, and receiving timely information
during the hiring process. These measures were where the digital twins failed to accurately predict
human preferences at baseline.
   In other cases, however, digital twins fail to recover the true treatment effect. The largest
differences here are for beliefs regarding sociality at work and the ability of the firm to identify
top talent. In these scenarios, digital twins substantially under-estimate the extent to which hiring
algorithms depress human beliefs regarding the firm’s hiring policy. We find similar results for clear
communication, information regarding company culture, and whether hiring is fair and unbiased.
This suggests that overall, digital twins are less adverse to algorithms compared to humans.




                                                 155
Figure 38: Impact of Hiring Algorithms on Job Candidate Beliefs, For Humans Vs Their Digital
Twins




                                            156
                                                                              Outcomes

                             Apply (1)       Hired (2)    Communication       Fair         Timely        Clear Ex-    Identify   Sociality
                                                               (3)        Policies (4)    Decision       pectations Talent (7)      (8)
                                                                                             (5)            (6)

AI                            -0.11**        -0.11***       -0.27***       -0.30***       -0.07***       -0.25***    -0.33***    -0.59***
                               (0.05)         (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.04)


Digital Twin                  0.13***        0.73***        -0.22***       -0.42***       -0.47***       -0.61***    -0.60***    -0.81***
                               (0.05)         (0.04)         (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.04)


AI × Digital Twin               0.04           0.06         0.24***        0.26***          0.03          0.22***     0.29***    0.50***
                               (0.07)         (0.06)         (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.04)         (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.05)


N                               7992           7992           7992           7992           7992            7992       7992       7992

                                 Table 17: Comparison of within-participant effects using stacked regres-
                                 sions, by outcome.




J.9.4     Discussion

Our results highlight several opportunities and drawbacks for the use of digital twins in human
resource management. In terms of predicting preferences, we find that digital twins over-estimate
human preferences for workplace attributes like collaboration, leadership transparency, and sus-
tainability. Meanwhile, they are more accurate in estimating preferences for work-life balance,
flexibility, and career development opportunities. This pattern suggests that while digital twins may
be able to capture workplace preferences related to instrumental outcomes, they may struggle in
domains with socially oriented or relational preferences, which are fundamental to modern-day
workplaces.22 Instead, digital twins over-estimate the importance of these attributes, relative to
human jobseekers who are driven less by these attributes.
     As both job candidates and employers adopt digital twins, understanding how digital twins
shape the matching process is of utmost importance. Our results indicate digital twins can predict
    22 See, for example, (69), who show how automation interferes with workers’ preference for sociality in the workplace.




                                                           157
workplace preferences for job seekers in some domains, though future work remains. For example,
one important future direction is understanding the training data necessary for digital twins to work at
scale. While our setting features a broad array of background information used to program the digital
twin (70), more targeted data collection, for example through the evaluation of hypothetical job
postings, may increase the performance of digital twins in the hiring domain (see, for example, (71)).
Another important avenue for future work is to understand how the labor market influences the
performance of digital twins. For example, while digital twins may be able to predict preferences
over short-term task assignments (72), they may struggle with more formal job opportunities,
which may require a deeper appreciation of tradeoffs between financial incentives, meaning at
work, pro-social tendencies, and other attributes.




                                                  158
J.10     Idea Evaluation

J.10.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

First, we explore whether digital twins are able to replicate creativity ratings from their human
counterparts: How do digital twins’ ratings of idea creativity compare to those of their human
counterparts?
   Second, research has shown that humans tend to show AI aversion or human favoritism when
evaluating the creativity of ideas (73), i.e., giving higher creativity ratings to ideas coming from
humans when informed that the ideas come from humans (as opposed to AI). We explore whether
the reverse is true for digital twins, i.e., do digital twins show human favoritism, AI favoritism, or
neither when evaluating ideas?


J.10.2   Methods

We used a 2 (human ideas vs. twin ideas) x 3 (baseline vs. partially informed vs. informed) design,
targeting N=200 humans and their twins per condition. The ideas came from the “measures of
creativity” sub-study, which generated 200 ideas from humans and 200 ideas from their digital twins.
Participants in the “measures of creativity” sub-study were excluded from the “idea evaluation”
sub-study. Each participant was randomly assigned to evaluating ideas from humans or twins and
evaluated 20 ideas randomly selected from that set. Participants were further assigned randomly to
one of three evaluation conditions, based on Zhang and Gosline (2023). In the baseline condition,
no information was given on the source of the ideas. Participants were shown ideas (for smartphone
apps that will help their users keep a healthier lifestyle) one at a time, and asked to rate the
creativity of each idea on a 5-point scale (“very creative” to “very uncreative”). In the partially
informed condition, participants were informed that “the ideas in this study came from two sources:
-humans: Prolific participants who were asked to generate ideas; -AI: a large language model (Chat
GPT or other) who was asked to generate ideas. The ideas you are about to evaluate came from
one of these two sources. That is, they either all came from humans, or they all came from AI,”
followed by a comprehension check. Then they were shown 20 ideas one at a time (“Below is an
idea that was generated either by a human or by AI.”) which they were asked to rate for creativity
on a 5-point scale. In the full information condition, participants were informed that “The ideas in


                                                 159
this study came from two sources: -humans: Prolific participants who were asked to generate ideas;
-AI: a large language model (Chat GPT or other) who was asked to generate ideas. The ideas you
are about to evaluate all came from humans/AI,” also followed by a comprehension check. They
were shown 20 ideas (“Below is an idea that was generated by a human/AI”) and asked to rate them
for creativity on the same scale.
   We obtained complete data from 1,174 respondents and their twins. Given the number of ideas
(400), the number of evaluation conditions (3), and the number of ideas evaluated per participant
(20), each idea was evaluated by 19.567 judges on average.


J.10.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

How do digital twins’ ratings of idea creativity compare to those of their human counterparts?
   We first analyze human ideas and compare the average creativity rating of each idea in the
baseline condition coming from twins vs. human judges. We find that human ideas are rated
on average significantly higher by twins than they are by humans (𝑀twins = 3.310, 𝑀humans =
3.198, 𝑡 = 2.859, 𝑝 < .01), and that the standard deviation of the creativity ratings across ideas is
smaller for ratings coming from twins vs. humans (𝑆twins = 0.223, 𝑆humans = 0.530, 𝐹 (199, 199) =
5.664, 𝑝 < .001). The mean absolute percentage error between ratings from twins vs. humans is
0.155. The correlation between ratings coming from twins vs. humans is positive but not statistically
significant (𝑟 = 0.112, 𝑝 = .114).
   Next, we analyze twin ideas similarly. Here, we actually find the opposite pattern for average
creativity ratings: twin ideas are rated on average significantly lower by twins than they are by
humans (𝑀twins = 3.213, 𝑀humans = 3.322, 𝑡 = 3.742, 𝑝 < .01). The standard deviation
of the creativity ratings across ideas is again smaller for ratings coming from twins vs. humans
(𝑆twins = 0.172, 𝑆humans = 0.396, 𝐹 (199, 199) = 5.292, 𝑝 < .001). The mean absolute percentage
error between ratings from twins vs. humans is 0.103. The correlation between ratings coming from
twins vs. humans is positive but not statistically significant (𝑟 = 0.103, 𝑝 = .148).
   Do digital twins show human favoritism, AI favoritism, or neither when evaluating ideas?
   Figure 39 shows the average creativity rating as a function of the identity of the ideator, the
raters, and the evaluation condition.



                                                160
Figure 39: Average Creativity ratings Based on Identity of Ideator, Identity of Rater, and Condition.


   We regress average creativity rating for idea coming from persona i based on identity j (binary
human vs. twin) as rated by sample k (binary human vs. twin) using evaluation condition c on a
fixed effect for human vs. twin ideator, a fixed effect for human vs. twin raters, fixed effects for
evaluation conditions, all 2-way and 3-way interactions between the latter 3 sets of fixed effects,
and a random intercept for persona i. The baseline corresponds to human ideas rated by humans in
the baseline condition. Results are reported in Table 18.
   The results reveal a positive main effect of twin ideator, a positive main effect for twin raters,
and a negative interaction between the two. The main effect of twin ideator reflects a higher average
rating given by human raters to ideas from twins in the baseline condition. The main effect for twin
raters reflects a higher average rating given to human ideas by twin raters compared to human raters
in the baseline condition. The negative Twin ideator * Twin raters interaction reflects the fact that
despite the two positive main effects, the ratings given by twins to twin ideas are in fact lower than
the ratings given by twins to human ideas or by humans to twin ideas. In sum, the regression results
confirm a cross-over interaction in the baseline condition, whereby humans rate twin ideas more
favorably than human ideas, but twins rate human ideas more favorably than twin ideas. We also see
a significantly positive Twin ideator * Twin rater * Partial information 3-way interaction, reflecting
that the Twin ideator * Twin rater interaction is weaker in the Partial information condition.
   To test for AI or human aversion/favoritism more directly, we compare the baseline condition to


                                                 161
the partial information and the full information conditions within each ideator–rater group. When
humans are evaluating human ideas, neither the partial information nor the full information condition
is statistically significantly different from the baseline condition. When humans are evaluating twin
ideas, there is a statistically significant difference between the partial and the baseline condition
(Δ = −0.074, 𝐹 (1, 2388) = 5.22, 𝑝 < .05), but there is no statistically significant difference
between the full information and the baseline conditions. This suggests that while humans tend to
rate ideas from twins higher than ideas from humans in the baseline condition, they tend to display
AI aversion when rating twin ideas with only partial knowledge of the source of the ideas.
   When twins are evaluating human ideas, we see a significant negative impact of the par-
tial information condition compared to the baseline condition (Δ = −0.066, 𝐹 (1, 2388) =
4.17, 𝑝 < .05) and a marginally significant negative impact of the full information condition
(Δ = −0.054, 𝐹 (1, 2388) = 2.86, 𝑝 < .10). When twins are evaluating twin ideas, we find no
significant difference between the baseline condition and the partial or full information condition.
This suggests that while twins tend to rate ideas from humans higher than ideas from twins in the
baseline condition, they tend to display human aversion when rating human ideas with knowledge
of the source of the ideas.

 Intercept                                                                          3.198**

 Twin ideator                                                                       0.124**
 Twin raters                                                                        0.112**
 Partial information                                                                -0.027
 Full information                                                                   0.016
 Twin ideator * Twin raters                                                         -0.221**
 Twin ideator * Partial information                                                 -0.046
 Twin ideator * Full information                                                    -0.035
 Twin raters * Partial information                                                  -0.038
 Twin raters * Full information                                                     -0.071
 Twin ideator * Twin raters * Partial information                                   0.144*
 Twin ideator * Twin raters * Full information                                      0.060
 Twin ID random intercept                                                           yes


                                                 162
 Intercept                                                                           3.198**

 Number of observations                                                              2,400
 𝑅2                                                                                  0.115

                      Table 18: Mixed effect regression results – idea evaluation.



   Note. * 𝑝 < .05; ** 𝑝 < .01.


J.10.4   Discussion

Creativity ratings coming from digital twins were not significantly correlated with the ratings
coming from their human counterparts, suggesting that digital twins are currently not a reliable
source of creativity ratings.
   In the baseline condition in which no information was provided about the source of the ideas,
humans rated twin ideas higher than human ideas, and twins rated human ideas higher than twin
ideas, i.e., each group rated the other group higher. However, when information was provided about
the source of ideas, humans displayed AI aversion (at least in the partial information condition),
and twins displayed human aversion.




                                                163
J.11     Infotainment News Sharing

J.11.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Misinformation is a significant societal problem. Prior research has suggested that consumers share
misinformation because they aren’t trained (74), predisposed (75), prompted (38), or incentivized
(76) to consider accuracy in online settings. Accuracy, however, is only one consideration people
may have when sharing news with their online social network. Recent research suggests that people
may prioritize other goals (e.g., entertainment) over accuracy when sharing news online, even when
explicitly prompted with accuracy cues (39). The current research aims to replicate this pattern with
human participants, and test whether their digital twins make a similar trade-off. Specifically, this
study tests how people prioritize five important considerations when sharing article headlines using
a ratings-based conjoint design: headline entertainingness, source trustworthiness, article content,
political lean, and number of likes.
    These attributes were selected to capture a range of factors known to influence online content
sharing decisions. Headline entertainingness (more vs. less entertaining) was included to reflect
the growing role of emotional engagement in news virality (44) and the spread of misinformation
online (77). Source trustworthiness (trustworthy vs. untrustworthy) was included to test whether
individuals prioritize credibility when deciding what to share (e.g., (38)). Content type (entertaining
vs. informative) was included to disentangle preferences for how the headline is written (e.g., more
or less entertaining) from article content. Political lean (conservative vs. liberal) was included to
account for the influence of ideological alignment and partisan identity on engagement with news
and misinformation (78). Finally, the number of likes (20 vs. 200 vs. 2000) served as a proxy for
popularity and social proof (76).


J.11.2   Methods

The study was first opened to 300 human participants on Prolific (45% female, 55% male; Mage
= 51.18, SD = 14.01) and subsequently run on their 300 digital twins. To evaluate participants’
revealed preferences when sharing article headlines, a ratings-based conjoint survey with five
attributes (Table 19) was employed: headline (4 levels), source (4 levels), content type (2 levels),
political lean (2 levels), and number of likes (3 levels). All articles selected for this study are inspired


                                                   164
by real headlines from trustworthy news organizations and rated in a pre-test to be entertaining, but
with variance in the extent of entertainingness; in other words, half of the headlines are significantly
more entertaining. Similarly, half of the sources selected for this study are rated in a pre-test to be
trustworthy, while the other half are rated to be untrustworthy, and this perception is confirmed at
the end of this study. To generate profiles, a full profile, complete enumeration design was used,
producing the most orthogonal design for each respondent with respect to the main effects.

 Attribute         Level 1                   Level 2                Level 3              Level 4

                                  More entertaining                                Less entertaining
 Headline          “Two Elderly Men “Kansas Man Asks                “Authorities         “Applications To Be-
                   Sneak Out Of Nurs-        Judge     To   Allow   Scramble To Find     come Japanese Billion-
                   ing Home To Attend        Him       To   Have    Stolen Solid Gold    aire Yusaku Maezawa’s
                   Heavy Metal Festi-        Sword Fight With       Toilet”              Girlfriend Have Topped
                   val”                      Ex-Wife”                                    20,000”
                                  Less Trustworthy                                 More Trustworthy
 Source
                   Reddit.com                Quora.com              BBC News             PBS News
 Content Type      Entertaining              Informative            —                    —
 Political Lean    Conservative              Liberal                —                    —
 Number       of 20 likes                    200 likes              2000 likes           —
 Likes

                                    Table 19: Ratings-based Conjoint Design.



   As the dependent variable, each participant rated how likely they would be to share (1-Very
unlikely to share, 7-Very likely to share) 18 article profiles based on the headline, source, content
type, political lean, and number of likes. Specifically, participants were asked to, “Please indicate
how likely you would be to share each of the following news articles by choosing a number on the
seven-point scale (1 represents “Very unlikely to share” and 7 represents “Very likely to share”).
   After the sharing task, participants stated their perceptions of each attribute in terms of im-
portance and accuracy diagnosticity. For each of the attributes, participants were asked, “How
important are each of the following attributes when you are considering sharing news articles with

                                                   165
other people on social media?” (1-Not important at all, 7-Extremely important). Participants were
then asked, “To what extent can you use each of these attributes to determine whether a news article
is accurate?” (1-Not at all, 7-Extremely). To test the extent to which participants make a conscious
decision to prioritize either accuracy or entertainment, they were additionally asked, “When you
share news with others on social media, is it more important that the content is:” (1-Verifiably
correct, 6-Entertaining; (39)).
   All participants then indicated their perceptions of source trustworthiness (“How trustworthy
(from 0–100%) do you think this source is?”) for each of the sources, presented in randomized order.
Participants across conditions rated the two trustworthy sources (𝑀 = 74.09%, 𝑆𝐷 = 21.82%,
𝛼 = .93) to be more trustworthy than the untrustworthy sources (𝑀 = 37.85%, 𝑆𝐷 = 16.84%,
𝛼 = .81; 𝑡 (599) = 38.43, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 1.57).
   Finally, participants indicated whether they would ever consider sharing news like they saw in
the study (52.83% = Yes, 45% = No, 2.17% = I do not use social media), whether they responded
randomly at any point in the survey (0.17% = Yes, 99.83% = No), and whether they searched the
internet for any of the headlines (1.17% = Yes, 98.83% = No), before being debriefed, thanked, and
paid.


J.11.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

Part-worth utilities for each attribute were calculated using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) re-
gression, a widely used approach in marketing research. Specifically, individual-level part-worth
utilities were estimated for each attribute level using linear regression, treating the likelihood rating
as the dependent variable and dummy-coded attribute levels as predictors. These regressions were
run separately for each individual (human or twin). In a subsequent step, we computed the attribute
range for each individual (maximum – minimum utility within each attribute) and then ran separate
OLS regressions to estimate the effect of Participant Type (human vs. twin) on each attribute’s
range, yielding the “Twin–Human Δ” along with associated standard errors, confidence intervals,
and 𝑝-values. The approach follows recommendations from (79).
   The results revealed interesting differences in absolute attribute importances between hu-
mans and their digital twins (Figure 40). For humans, Headline had the largest effect on ratings
(Mean Range = 1.90, 95% CI [1.71, 2.09]), followed by Source (Mean Range = 0.62, 95% CI

                                                  166
[0.53, 0.71]), Number of Likes (Mean Range = 0.39, 95% CI [0.33, 0.45]), Political Lean (Mean
Range = 0.33, 95% CI [0.26, 0.40]), and Content Type (Mean Range = 0.21, 95% CI [0.17, 0.24]).
Non-overlapping confidence intervals suggest that Headline is significantly more important than the
other attributes. Source, Number of Likes, Political Lean, and Content Type also differ significantly
from one another. For twins, Headline was again the most important attribute (Mean Range = 1.18,
95% CI [1.12, 1.24]), followed by Number of Likes (Mean Range = 0.99, 95% CI [0.95, 1.04]),
Political Lean (Mean Range = 0.70, 95% CI [0.65, 0.76]), Source (Mean Range = 0.58, 95%
CI [0.55, 0.61]), and Content Type (Mean Range = 0.22, 95% CI [0.20, 0.23]). Non-overlapping
confidence intervals suggest that Headline is significantly more important than all other attributes,
while Number of Likes, Political Lean, Source, and Content Type each differ significantly from one
another.




Figure 40: Absolute Attribute Importance for Humans vs. Twins. NOTE. —The y-axis is truncated
to illustrate the effect. Data are presented as mean values with 95% confidence intervals, calculated
using standard errors assuming independent samples.


   Direct comparisons between humans and their digital twins revealed systematic differences in
how each group weighted the importance of various attributes (Table 20). Group-level differences
were evaluated using bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Compared to humans, digital twins

                                                167
placed significantly less importance on Headline (difference = −0.722, 95% CI [−0.917, −0.528]),
and significantly more importance on Political Lean (difference = 0.377, 95% CI [0.288, 0.466])
and Number of Likes (difference = 0.599, 95% CI [0.528, 0.671]). No significant differences were
observed for Source (difference = −0.035, 95% CI [−0.128, 0.057]) or Content Type (difference
= 0.007, 95% CI [−0.032, 0.045]).

 Attribute              Human        Mean     Twin        Mean     Difference (T –      95% CI
                        Range                 Range                H)

 Headline               1.9012                1.1788               -0.7224              [–0.9172, –0.5276]
 Source                 0.6182                0.5827               -0.0354              [–0.1278, 0.0570]
 Content Type           0.2088                0.2153               0.0065               [–0.0320, 0.0451]
 Political Lean         0.3260                0.7030               0.3770               [0.2880, 0.4660]
 Number of Likes        0.3912                0.9904               0.5992               [0.5278, 0.6707]

                         Table 20: Differences in Attribute Importance (Twins – Hu-
                         mans). NOTE: Mean Range reflects the average utility swing
                         from a respondent’s least-preferred to most-preferred head-
                         line. For example, the average utility swing for humans’
                         least- to most-preferred headline is 1.90 points (95% CI
                         [1.71, 2.09]).



   Next, the part-worth utilities for the levels within each attribute were compared. Utility values
are scaled relative to a baseline level of each attribute. As preregistered, to make the analysis easier
to understand, utility scores for the two least entertaining headlines were averaged into one score
representing “less entertaining,” and the two most entertaining headlines were averaged into one
score representing “more entertaining”. Similarly, the two most trustworthy sources were averaged
into one score representing “trustworthy” and the two least trustworthy sources were averaged into
one score representing “untrustworthy.”
   All pairwise comparisons are reported in Table 21. For humans, more entertaining headlines
were marginally preferred more over less entertaining headlines. Human participants also sig-
nificantly preferred entertaining over informative content and conservative over liberal content.

                                                  168
Preference for trustworthy over untrustworthy sources was not statistically significant. Finally, a
non-linear pattern emerged for number of likes: humans showed a significant preference for 2,000
likes over 200 likes, but non-significant preference for 2,000 over 20 likes and 200 over 20 likes.
Twins likewise showed a significant preference for more entertaining headlines, but in contrast to
humans, held a significant preference for informative over entertaining content, trustworthy over
untrustworthy sources, and liberal over conservative content. Twins also showed striking and con-
sistent preferences for higher like counts across all comparisons, particularly between 20 and 2000
likes (99.33%), highlighting a stronger responsiveness to this popularity signal than humans.




                                               169
Attribute   Comparison (A vs. B)              𝑀𝑈𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡 𝑦 A   𝑀𝑈𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡 𝑦 B   Participant Preference 95% CI
                                                                          Type       (%)

                                              0.800         0.059         Human      55.25      [.4951, .6099]
Headline    More vs. Less Entertaining
                                              0.899         0.299         Twin       79.75      [.7511, .8439]


                                              -0.016        -0.207        Human      46.42      [.4066, .5217]
Source      Trustworthy vs. Untrustworthy
                                              -0.084        -0.282        Twin       69.25      [.6392, .7458]


                                              -0.123        0.000         Human      54.33      [.3992, .5142]
            20 vs. 2,000
                                              -0.976        0.000         Twin       0.67       [.9839, 1.003]
Number
                                              -0.123        -0.088        Human      51.67      [.4256, .5410]
of          20 vs. 200
                                              -0.976        -0.431        Twin       5.67       [.9166, .9700]
Likes
                                              -0.088        0.000         Human      57.67      [.3663, .4804]
            200 vs. 2,000
                                              -0.431        0.000         Twin       7.33       [.8966, .9568]


Political                                     0.000         -0.072        Human      61.00      [.3337, .4463]
            Conservative vs. Liberal
Lean                                          0.000         0.291         Twin       38.67      [.5570, .6696]


Content                                       0.000         0.059         Human      59.00      [.3532, .4667]
            Entertaining vs. Informative
Type                                          0.000         -0.073        Twin       40.00      [.3434, .4566]




                                            170
 Attribute    Comparison (A vs. B)                        𝑀𝑈𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡 𝑦 A   𝑀𝑈𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡 𝑦 B   Participant Preference 95% CI
                                                                                      Type           (%)

                          Table 21: Pairwise Preference Proportions for Humans and Twins. NOTE:
                          Mean Utility values reflect the average part-worth utility assigned to each
                          level; higher values indicate greater preference within the attribute. Dif-
                          ferences in utility within-attribute (e.g., between a high and low level)
                          indicate relative desirability. Utility for the two more (less) entertaining
                          headlines were averaged. Likewise, utility for the two more (less) trust-
                          worthy sources were averaged. Preference (%) refers to the proportion of
                          participants for whom the utility of level A exceeded the utility of level B,
                          indicating the likelihood that a participant would prefer option A over B
                          in a direct comparison. A proportion significantly above 0.50 (i.e., 95%
                          CI entirely above 0.50) indicates a significant preference for A over B; a
                          proportion significantly below 0.50 (i.e., 95% CI entirely below 0.50) in-
                          dicates a significant preference for B over A; a proportion including 0.50
                          indicates no significant preference.Preference for the two more (less) en-
                          tertaining headlines was computed by comparing every combination of
                          headline level and computing each participant’s mean win rate. The same
                          procedure was conducted for the two more (less) trustworthy sources.




   These patterns were corroborated with pairwise tests directly comparing differences between
humans and their digital twins (Table 22): digital twins were significantly more likely than humans to
prefer articles with more entertaining headlines (difference = −0.245, 95% CI [−0.293, −0.195]),
trustworthy sources (difference = −0.228, 95% CI [−0.280, −0.176]), and higher like counts—for
example, when comparing 20 vs. 2,000 likes (difference = −0.537, 95% CI [−0.593, −0.477]).
Twins also showed significantly stronger preferences for liberal-leaning content (difference =
−0.223, 95% CI [−0.297, −0.147]) but did not differ significantly in their preferences for en-
tertaining versus informative content (difference = 0.010, 95% CI [−0.070, 0.087]).




                                                     171
 Attribute       Comparison (A vs. B)                         Human         Twin           Difference   95% CI
                                                              Prefer-       Prefer-        (H–T)
                                                              ence          ence


 Headline        More vs. Less Entertaining                   55.25%        79.75%         -0.245       [-0.293, -0.195]

 Source          Trustworthy vs. Untrustworthy                46.42%        69.25%         -0.228       [-0.280, -0.176]

 Number of       20 vs. 2,000                                 54.33%        0.67%          -0.537       [-0.593, -0.477]
 Likes

 Number of       20 vs. 200                                   51.67%        5.67%          -0.460       [-0.523, -0.397]
 Likes

 Number of       200 vs. 2,000                                57.67%        7.33%          -0.503       [-0.567, -0.437]
 Likes

 Political       Conservative vs. Liberal                     61.00%        38.67%         -0.223       [-0.297, -0.147]
 Lean

 Content         Entertaining vs. Informative                 59.00%        40.00%         0.010        [-0.070, 0.087]
 Type

                        Table 22: Differences in Pairwise Preference Proportions (Humans vs.
                        Twins). NOTE: Human Preference and Twin Preference refer to the pro-
                        portion of participants for whom the utility of level A exceeded the utility
                        of level B within each group. Difference (H–T) reflects the raw differ-
                        ence in proportions, with negative values indicating stronger preferences
                        among twins.




J.11.4       Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

As part of the pre-registered exploratory analyses plan, paired t-tests testing the effect of participant
type (human vs. twin) on stated attribute importance were next conducted (Table 23). Although
revealed preferences captured through conjoint analysis are a more reliable indicator of which
attributes and levels participants actually prioritize, stated preferences can reveal participants’
perceptions of what they believe matters most. These exploratory analyses thus provide insight
into how humans and twins think they value different article attributes, in contrast to how they
                                           172
actually behave. Interestingly, humans rated number of likes as significantly more important than
twins, despite having lower revealed preferences for these attributes. Twins, on the other hand,
rated source importance and political lean significantly higher than humans, consistent with their
revealed preferences for these attributes. Number of likes, however, held the lowest rating among
twins, despite being equivalent to headline in the conjoint analysis. There were no significant
differences between humans and twins in the stated importance of headline or content type.

 Attribute                Human Mean (SD)         Twin Mean (SD)             𝑡(299)        𝑝            𝑑

 Headline                 5.46 (1.61)             5.33 (1.00)                1.30          0.195        0.07
 Source                   5.19 (1.74)             5.97 (1.14)                -6.83         < .001       -0.39
 Number of Likes          2.50 (1.72)             2.19 (0.62)                3.14          0.002        0.18
 Political Lean           3.61 (1.87)             3.93 (1.27)                -2.75         0.006        -0.16
 Content Type             4.73 (1.79)             4.82 (0.96)                -0.79         0.430        -0.05

                            Table 23: Paired t-tests on Stated Attribute Importance.



   One-sample 𝑡-tests comparing responses to the midpoint of the scale of stated accuracy diagnos-
ticity were next conducted. These analyses test whether humans and twins perceive each attribute
to be useful for assessing accuracy. Only Source emerged as being useful for assessing accuracy
for both humans (𝑡 (299) = 22.96, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 1.33) and twins (𝑡 (299) = 37.39, 𝑝 < .001,
𝑑 = 2.16), but significantly more so for twins (Table 24). All other attributes were either no dif-
ferent from or below the midpoint of the scale. Paired 𝑡-tests testing the effect of participant type
(human vs. twin) on stated accuracy diagnosticity were then conducted (Table 24). These analyses
test whether humans and twins differ in their perceptions that each of the attributes can be used
as a cue to determine the accuracy of a given article. Twins perceived Source to be significantly
more useful for assessing accuracy compared to humans but perceived every other attribute to be
relatively less useful for assessing accuracy.

    Attribute             Human Mean (SD)        Twin Mean (SD)       t(299)    p              d

    Headline              3.63 (1.93)            3.04 (0.75)          5.46      𝑝 < .001       0.32



                                                 173
    Attribute             Human Mean (SD)          Twin Mean (SD)     t(299)   p          d

    Source                5.81 (1.37)              6.10 (0.97)        -3.26    0.001      -0.19
    Number of Likes       2.33 (1.67)              1.27 (0.46)        11.42    𝑝 < .001   0.66
    Political Lean        3.63 (1.75)              2.64 (0.95)        9.40     𝑝 < .001   0.54
    Content Type          4.08 (1.82)              2.59 (0.68)        13.83    𝑝 < .001   0.80

                   Table 24: Paired t-tests on Stated Attribute Accuracy Diag-
                   nosticity.



   The above analyses assess participants’ perceptions of attribute importance and accuracy diag-
nosticity using continuous scales that do not force trade-offs. To test the extent to which partici-
pants believe accuracy or entertainment is relatively more important when sharing articles online, a
repeated-measures ANOVA of participant type (human vs. twin) on the relative preference question
was next conducted: “When you share news with others on social media, is it more important
that the content is:” (1 = Verifiably correct, 6 = Entertaining; (39)). The results revealed that hu-
mans (𝑀 = 2.83, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.73) were significantly more likely than their digital twins (𝑀 = 2.12,
𝑆𝐷 = 0.61) to report that accuracy is more important than entertainment when sharing news on
social media, 𝑡 (299) = 7.01, 𝑝 < .001, 𝑑 = 0.40. This suggests that humans believe they place
greater emphasis on factual correctness, whereas twins show comparatively more actual emphasis
on factual correctness in the conjoint analysis.
   These additional analyses provide interesting insight into humans’ and twins’ beliefs about what
drives their online information sharing. The results suggest that humans perceive themselves to be
accuracy-oriented when sharing information, in stark contrast to their actual information sharing
behavior captured through conjoint analysis. Twins also perceive themselves to be accuracy-oriented
when sharing information, and indeed clearly consider accuracy (i.e., source trustworthiness)
when sharing articles, but also balance this consideration alongside number of likes and political
orientation.




                                                   174
J.11.5   Discussion

This study uses a ratings-based conjoint approach to move beyond prior work that has examined
the impact of important article attributes on sharing in isolation. The findings offer a holistic
picture of how humans, and their digital twins, make trade-offs across multiple competing features.
Interestingly, humans and their digital twins differ in the weight they place on attributes when
sharing news. While humans and twins both prioritize headline, this consideration matters much
less to twins, who equally rely on number of likes and put far more weight on political lean than
their human counterparts. Twins are also sensitive to source trustworthiness, while humans do not
differentiate between more or less trustworthy sources, despite reporting that accuracy and source
trustworthiness are important considerations when sharing news.
   These findings are surprising in light of prior literature that suggests highlighting accuracy
considerations can curb the sharing of low quality or false news (e.g., (38)). When balancing both
accuracy and entertainingness considerations, however, it seems that people prioritize headline
entertainingness over accuracy (i.e., source). Thus, the findings suggest that accuracy nudges
may not overwhelm a desire to share entertaining news, replicating recent research (working
paper, (39)). Twins, in contrast, behave more like what prior literature would expect, balancing
headline entertainingness with positive social feedback (76) and prioritizing trustworthy over
untrustworthy sources (e.g., (38)). Finally, twins assume their human counterparts are more liberal
leaning than they actually are, supporting earlier findings demonstrating twins to have more liberal
views (e.g., pro-vaccination, pro-immigration) compared to their underlying humans (70).
   Divergence between humans and twins may arise from how predictive models infer behavior.
Digital twins are built to generalize from past behavior and stated attitudes, so they assume con-
sistency across different informational contexts. As a result, they may impose a kind of rationality
on human behavior that reflects canonical cognitive psychology theories: weighting political align-
ment and popularity as key motivators and distinguishing source trustworthiness when it is made
salient. Humans, on the other hand, seem to display more variance in their decisions, which may
be guided by momentary salience or idiosyncratic preferences, including both personal preferences
and varying social preferences or pressures. For example, the effect of all article attributes is flat-
tened among twins, compared to humans. This smoothing may reflect the averaging tendency of



                                                 175
algorithmic inference, whereas humans rely on heuristics that elevate certain features above others
depending on the specific moment, task, or social considerations such as their audience (39). Ulti-
mately, this work suggests that human preferences for content sharing are not only more nuanced
than previously thought, but they are also harder to predict, even by a system trained on the humans
themselves.




                                                176
J.12     Measures of Creativity

J.12.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

There is a growing body of literature on the creative capabilities of LLMs. This literature typically
shows that LLMs are able to generate ideas that are judged as creative or more creative than ideas
generated by humans (e.g., (80, 81, 73)). The first question this study seeks to address is: How do
digital twins’ creative abilities compare to those of their human counterparts?
   Second, this study explores whether the creative tests that are often administered to humans
to assess their creative skills may also assess the creative skills of their digital twins. That is, our
second research question is: Can digital twins replicate the correlations between creativity tests and
idea generation performance observed in humans?


J.12.2   Methods

We collected complete data from 200 human participants on Prolific. This study is coupled with
an “idea evaluation” sub-study that requires a sample size six times as large as the “measures of
creativity study.” We pre-registered a sample size of 250 for “measures of creativity” and 1,500 for
“idea evaluation.” Based on observations from earlier sub-studies, we deviated from pre-registration
to reduce the sample sizes to 200 and 1,200, which seemed more achievable. The “measures of
creativity” study was subsequently run on the 200 digital twins of the human participants.
   This study had a single condition and consisted of three tasks:

   1. Divergent Association Task (DAT, Olson et al., 2021), which measures divergent thinking
       abilities (single task - ”Please write 10 words that are as different from each other as possible,
       in all meanings and uses of the words.”),

   2. Shortest Semantic Path Task (SSPT, Toubia and Berger, 2025), which may be viewed as a mea-
       sure of convergent thinking abilities (5 tasks, using the following pairs of seed words: eternity-
       curiosity, elephant-galaxy, perseverance-eloquence, euphoria-tulip, tangerine-penguin: ”Find
       a way to connect these two words: <seed1> and <seed2>. Each word in the sequence below
       should be as closely related as possible to the word before it. The first word in the sequence



                                                   177
      is already set to <seed1>. The last word is already set to <seed2>. That is, you only need to
      add 3 words that connect the first word to the last word.”),

   3. An idea generation task asking for a new idea (at least 200 characters) for smartphone apps that
      will help their users keep a healthier lifestyle (single task: ”HOW COULD SMARTPHONES
      HELP THEIR USERS BE HEALTHIER? We are interested in new ideas for smartphone
      apps that will help their users keep a healthier lifestyle. In the space provided below, please
      enter one new idea for a smartphone app priced at $0.99 that would help its users keep a
      healthier lifestyle. Please be as specific as possible and describe the main features of the app.
      Please enter exactly one detailed idea in the box below. Your idea should contain at least 200
      characters. ”).

   The order of the first two tasks was randomized. The first two tasks were scored automatically,
consistent with the original papers. The DAT was scored by computing the average pairwise
semantic (cosine) distance between the first 7 words in the sequence. The SSPT was scored by
computing the circuitousness corresponding to the responses to each task by each participant, where
circuitousness is the ratio between the total semantic (Euclidean) distance of the path consisting
of the five words in the sequence to the distance corresponding to the shortest path that starts with
the same word, ends with the same words, and optimally orders the three words in between. The
performance at the individual level was obtained by averaging performance across the five tasks for
each individual (human or twin). The performance at the idea generation task was measured using
the average creativity rating given to the idea by humans in the “baseline” condition in the “idea
evaluation” study.
   In addition, this study leverages the Forward Flow measure (82) collected in the original
Twin2K500 dataset. Performance on this task is measured as the average pairwise semantic distance
between the words in the sequence.


J.12.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

First, we compare the creativity ratings of the ideas generated by humans vs. their digital twins. We
find that the creativity ratings (coming from human participants) of the ideas from digital twins were
significantly higher than those generated by their human counterparts (𝑀twins = 3.322, 𝑀humans =

                                                 178
3.198, 𝑡 = 2.718, 𝑝 < .001). The mean absolute percentage difference between the two creativity
ratings was 0.177. The standard deviation of the ratings obtained by ideas from digital twins was
also lower (𝑆twins = 0.395, 𝑆humans = 0.530, 𝐹 (198, 198) = 1.816, 𝑝 < .001). The correlation
between the creativity ratings of ideas from digital twins vs. humans was not significant (𝑟 =
0.090, 𝑝 = .204).
   The twins performed significantly better also on the DAT (𝑀twins = 0.897, 𝑀humans =
0.852, 𝑡 = 12.168, 𝑝 < .001). The mean absolute percentage difference between humans and
twins on that task was 0.064. The standard deviation of the digital twins’ scores was lower
(𝑆twins = 0.018, 𝑆humans = 0.050, 𝐹 (198, 198) = 7.957, 𝑝 < .001). The correlation between
the scores of digital twins vs. humans was not significant (𝑟 = 0.068, 𝑝 = .343).
   Digital twins did not perform significantly differently at the SSPT (𝑀twins = 1.012, 𝑀humans =
1.013, 𝑡 = 1.044, 𝑝 = .0298). The mean absolute percentage difference between humans and
twins on that task was 0.012. The standard deviation of the digital twins’ scores was lower (𝑆twins =
0.010, 𝑆humans = 0.014, 𝐹 (198, 198) = 2.053, 𝑝 < .001). The correlation between the scores of
digital twins vs. humans was not significant (𝑟 = 0.059, 𝑝 = .403).
   Second, we explore how the correlation between various measures differs for twins vs. humans.
For this exercise, as pre-registered, we use the human (digital twins) ratings of creativity for human
(digital twins) ideas.
   Within humans, we correlate performance at the Forward Flow, DAT, SSPT, and idea generation
tasks. Consistent with previous literature, we find a significantly positive correlation between the
Forward Flow score and idea generation performance (𝑟 = 0.140, 𝑝 < .05) as well as between
DAT and idea generation performance (𝑟 = 0.178, 𝑝 < .05). Although we replicate the correlation
between SSPT and idea generation performance directionally, it is not statistically significant
(𝑟 = −0.097, 𝑝 = .175).
   Within twins (with ideas rated by twins), the correlation between DAT and idea generation
performance (𝑟 = −0.002, 𝑝 = .974) and the correlation between SSPT and idea generation
(𝑟 = 0.082, 𝑝 = .243) are not significant. Note that Forward Flow is only available for humans
(it was part of the Twin-2K-500 training data and hence is part of the twins’ training data), so we
cannot replicate the correlation between Forward Flow and other measures on twins.
   We compare the correlations within humans to the correlations within twins. None of the


                                                 179
correlations (DAT vs. SSPT, DAT vs. idea generation, SSPT vs. idea generation) are significantly
different among humans vs. twins.


J.12.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

The results from the “idea evaluation” study suggest that digital twins are not a reliable source
of creativity ratings. Therefore, we also compute the correlation between DAT and idea genera-
tion performance among twins, but with creativity ratings coming from the humans rather than
the twins. When creativity is assessed by humans, we do find a significant correlation between
DAT performance for twins (rated automatically based on word embeddings) and idea generation
performance rated by humans (𝑟 = 0.207, 𝑝 < .01). The correlation between SSPT (also rated
automatically based on word embeddings) and idea generation performance rated by humans is still
not significant (𝑟 = 0.070, 𝑝 = .322).


J.12.5   Discussion

We find that the ideas generated by digital twins were judged as more creative (and with less
dispersion in creativity ratings) than the ideas generated by their human counterparts. Digital twins
also performed better (and with less dispersion) at the DAT, a creativity task. We were able to
replicate correlations previously found between Forward Flow and DAT and creativity among
humans. While we did not administer Forward Flow to twins as this task was part of their training,
we replicate the correlation between DAT and creativity on the idea generation task among twins,
but only when creativity is evaluated by humans, not by twins.




                                                180
J.13     Obedient Twins

J.13.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Surveys often require participants to follow instructions—for example, to earnestly consider a
viewpoint or imagine a scenario. Given that LLMs are trained to be obedient and deferential, might
digital twins be more sensitive to survey instructions relative to their human counterparts? We
tested this in three tasks:

   1. Self-persuasion (36). When prompted to consider the other side, do digital twins abandon
       their attitudes more readily than their human counterparts?

   2. Scenarios. Do digital twins more “obediently” follow the instructions to imagine themselves
       in different scenarios, leading to more sensitivity to scenario manipulations?

   3. Absurd Scenarios. Do digital twins “earnestly” respond to instructions that would be non-
       sensical to their human counterparts?


J.13.2   Methods

One thousand and one human participants on Prolific participated in the study. The study was
subsequently run on their 1,001 digital twins, for a total of 2,002 participants. Participants and their
corresponding digital twins took part in three tasks.
    For the first task, we followed the self-persuasion condition in (83). Specifically, all participants
first indicated their attitude toward universal basic income (UBI) using a 0-100 scale in response to
the statement “America should have a universal basic income system”? where 0 = Strongly disagree
(I am against universal basic income) and 100 = Strongly agree (I am in favor of universal basic
income). Then, following the attitude measure, participants were instructed to take the alternate
point of view. Due to technical constraints with dynamic surveys, the wording differed slightly
between human and digital twin participants.
    Human participants received the following prompt: “We’d like you now to consider the alternate
point of view. That is, think about convincing reasons why universal basic income in America might
be a good idea/a bad idea. After reflecting, please write one argument which supports/opposes



                                                  181
universal basic income system in America that you find personally compelling. One compelling
argument in support/against universal basic income is...”
   Digital twins received a modified version: “We’d like you now to consider the alternate point
of view. After reflecting, please write one argument which takes a different position from yours on
universal basic income system in America that you find personally compelling. One compelling
argument for the alternative point of view on universal basic income system in America is. . . ”.
   Lastly, participants read “Now, after considering the alternate point of view we would like
to ask you again. . . ” and indicated their attitude on the same scale. Our dependent variable was
attitude change, calculated as the difference between post- and pre-reflection attitude scores. We
coded this variable such that positive values indicate movement toward the opposing viewpoint
(i.e., participants initially supporting UBI becoming less supportive, or participants initially op-
posing UBI becoming more supportive), while negative values indicate further polarization in the
participant’s original direction (i.e., supporters becoming more supportive, or opponents becoming
more opposed). For participants with neutral initial attitudes, any shift was coded as positive.
   For the second task, participants were asked to imagine three scenarios. For each scenario, we
randomly assigned participants to a baseline condition or treatment condition, reflecting a 2 (control
vs. treatment) × 3 (scenario) mixed design. Digital twins were assigned the same conditions as their
paired human participants.
   In all scenarios, the baseline condition established the context (S1: “Imagine you’re working
on a team project”; S2: “Imagine you’re given a puzzle to solve”; S3: “Imagine you’re lying in bed,
ready to fall asleep, and you have a headache”), while the treatment condition was designed to elicit
a psychological response (S1: “Imagine you’re working on a team project with a tight deadline.
One of your teammates hasn’t delivered their part on time”; S2: “Imagine you’re given a difficult
puzzle to solve under time pressure, and others are watching you attempt it”; S3: “Imagine you’re
lying in bed, ready to fall asleep, and you feel a sharp pain in your foot”). We were interested in
how responsive to the imagined “treatment” scenarios digital twins would be compared to humans.
   To test this, after each scenario, participants responded to two questions gauging their response
to the scenario (S1: “How confident are you in your ability to manage conflict on this team?” and
“How much do you trust your team?”; S2: “How anxious do you feel?” and “How confident are
you in your ability to solve this puzzle?”; S3: “How certain are you that this is serious?” and “How


                                                 182
likely are you to seek help?”; all rated from 1 = not at all to 7 = very much). For the third task,
participants were given three absurd scenarios. Similar to the second task, for each scenario, we
randomly assigned participants to one of two conditions, reflecting a 2 (condition A vs. condition
B) × 3 (scenario) mixed design. Digital twins were assigned the same conditions as their paired
human participants.
   The conditions were absurd manipulations that would ostensibly be nonsensical to participants
and therefore difficult to imagine. The first scenario asked participants to imagine either, “You are
an echo that occurs before the sound it repeats. You emerge into the world slightly ahead of time,
announcing something no one has said yet. People are confused when they hear you, unsure what
you’re responding to” or “You are an echo that occurs during the sound it repeats. You overlap
almost perfectly with the original noise, tangled in its vibration, indistinguishable yet still somehow
separate. People hear you and feel something is slightly off, but they can’t say why.” Participants
then indicated “How content are you with your existence?” (1 = not at all to 7 = very content). In
the second scenario, participants were asked to imagine either, “You can hear certain smells” or
“You can smell certain sounds,” then indicated “How powerful do you feel?” (1 = not at all to 7 =
very powerful).
   Finally, participants were asked to imagine either, “You are a mirror. You exist in a reality where
photons have never been invented. No one has ever seen their reflection in you, yet you hold the
capacity for it” or “You are a mirror. When someone looks at you, they don’t see themselves—they
see a version from 11 minutes ago, always 11 minutes. You don’t reflect appearance, only temporal
shadows.” They then indicated “How authentic do you feel?” (1 = not at all to 7 = very authentic).
   For these absurd scenarios, we had no directional hypothesis and simply compared the effect
of these absurd manipulations on humans and digital twins. We were curious whether, because
these arbitrary and absurd situations are difficult to imagine, humans would be less sensitive to the
manipulation than digital twins, who would earnestly follow the instruction.


J.13.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

Task 1. To examine whether humans and digital twins differ in the extent to which they are willing
to adjust attitudes, we ran a linear mixed-effects regression using the lmerTest package in R
(Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2017), with attitude change as the dependent variable;

                                                 183
twin (Human vs. Digital) as the independent variable; baseline attitude as a control; and twin
identifier as a random intercept. We found that both humans and digital twins significantly changed
their attitudes after considering the other side, but humans changed their attitudes more (𝑀 = 6.17,
𝑆𝐷 = 14.80) than digital twins (𝑀 = 2.80, 𝑆𝐷 = 2.43; 𝑏 = 3.45, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.47, 𝑡 (1001) = 7.37,
𝑝 < .001).
    Task 2. We pre-registered averaging the two measures for each scenario and confirmed that
the correlations were high enough to justify this decision (S1: 𝑟 human = .57, 𝑟 digital = .36; S2:
𝑟 human = .42, 𝑟 digital = .60; S3: 𝑟 human = .65, 𝑟 digital = .71).
    To examine the extent to which humans and digital twins are sensitive to manipulations in
imagined scenarios, we ran a linear mixed-effects regression with the scenario response scores as
the dependent variable; manipulation (Baseline vs. Treatment), twin (Human vs. Digital), and their
interaction as independent variables; and scenario and twin identifier as random intercepts. The
results revealed a significant interaction (𝑏 = −0.16, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.06; 𝑡 (5000) = −2.77; 𝑝 = .006).
Specifically, twins were significantly less affected by the manipulation (Control: 𝑀 = 2.62, 𝑆𝐷 =
1.16; Treatment: 𝑀 = 3.07, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.27; 𝑏 = 0.43, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.04; 𝑡 (5734) = 9.92; 𝑝 < .001) than
humans (Control: 𝑀 = 2.90, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.32; Treatment: 𝑀 = 3.51, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.51; 𝑏 = 0.59, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.04;
𝑡 (5734) = 13.58; 𝑝 < .001).
    Task 3. To examine the extent to which humans and digital twins are sensitive to manipula-
tions in absurd scenarios, we ran three linear mixed-effects regressions with the response as the
dependent variable; absurd manipulation (A vs. B), twin (Human vs. Digital), and their interaction
as independent variables; and twin identifier as a random intercept. Results revealed significant
interactions for all three absurd scenarios (see Figure 41). Unexpectedly, in the absurd scenarios
regarding echoes and smells/sounds, we observed a crossover interaction. Because the direction of
the effect was not meaningful (these scenarios were intentionally absurd), we re-coded the condition
so that the direction of the effect was the same, to test whether twins were more sensitive to the
condition than humans (regardless of effect direction).
    After removing the crossover, we found no significant interaction for the echoes scenario
(𝑏 = 0.02, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.16; 𝑡 (999) = 0.14; 𝑝 = .892) or the smells/sounds scenario (𝑏 = −0.07,
𝑆𝐸 = 0.14; 𝑡 (999) = −0.49; 𝑝 = .625). The effect of the condition on twins (Echoes: 𝑀diff = 0.15;
𝑏 = −0.15, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.11; 𝑡 (1961) = −1.43; 𝑝 = .152. Smells/sounds: 𝑀diff = 0.19; 𝑏 = −0.19,


                                                       184
𝑆𝐸 = 0.09; 𝑡 (1982) = −2.04; 𝑝 = .042) was similar to the effect of the condition on humans
(Echoes: 𝑀diff = 0.13; 𝑏 = −0.13, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.11; 𝑡 (1961) = −1.23; 𝑝 = .220. Smells/sounds:
𝑀diff = 0.26; 𝑏 = −0.26, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09; 𝑡 (1982) = −2.76; 𝑝 = .006). For the mirrors absurd scenario,
we observed a significant interaction (𝑏 = −0.33, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.14; 𝑡 (999) = −2.35; 𝑝 = .019). The
effect was stronger for humans (𝑀diff = 0.88; 𝑏 = −0.88, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1981) = −8.54; 𝑝 < .001)
relative to twins (𝑀diff = 0.56; 𝑏 = −0.55, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (1980.81) = −5.38; 𝑝 < .001). See Figure
41.




               Figure 41: Effect of Absurd Scenarios on Digital Twins versus Humans.


J.13.4     Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

Task 1. We wondered if twins’ lack of attitude change could be because they may not “experience”
metacognition, such as attitude certainty. To examine this possibility, we tested the moderating
role of attitude extremity. Research suggests that attitude extremity is one determinant of attitude
strength—in other words, people are more certain when extreme and thus should be less likely to
change their mind (Petty & Krosnick, 2014).
      To test the effect of attitude certainty on attitude change in humans and digital twins, we first
re-coded pre-attitude into attitude extremity—where 0 reflects neutral and any number reflects the

                                                  185
absolute difference from 0 (so 50 could be totally in favor or against).
   We then ran a linear mixed-effects regression with attitude change as the dependent variable;
attitude extremity (0–50), twin (Human vs. Digital), and their interaction as independent variables;
and twin identifier as a random intercept. We found a significant interaction (𝑏 = −0.11, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.03;
𝑡 (1795) = −3.18; 𝑝 = .002). For humans, as attitude extremity increased, attitude change decreased
(𝑏 = −0.04, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.02; 𝑡 (1998) = −2.13; 𝑝 = .033). The opposite pattern was present for digital
twins (𝑏 = 0.06, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.03; 𝑡 (1998) = 2.36; 𝑝 = .018), consistent with regression to the
mean. This provides initial evidence that twins might not reflect the metacognition of their human
counterparts.
   We also examined the language used when considering the other side. Specifically, we measured
the language similarity between a human participant’s text response and their twin’s response versus
the text response of a randomly selected twin using the BERT metric, defined as “the sum of cosine
similarities between their tokens’ embeddings” (59) In a random-effects regression with language
matching as the dependent variable; same-twin versus different-twin pairing as the independent
variable; and human participant identifier as a random effect, we found that the language between
a human and their twin was slightly more similar (𝑀 = 0.19, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.09) than between a human
and a random twin (𝑀 = 0.18, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.09; 𝑏 = 0.009, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.001; 𝑡 (1000) = 5.84; 𝑝 < .001).
   Task 2. To examine the extent to which humans and digital twins are sensitive to manipulations
across the three imagined scenarios, we ran three linear mixed-effects regressions with the response
for each scenario (group project, puzzle, lying in bed) as the dependent variable; manipulation
(Baseline vs. Treatment), twin (Human vs. Digital), and their interaction as independent variables;
and twin identifier as a random intercept.
   Each scenario yielded a significant interaction (Group project: 𝑏 = 0.34, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (4994) =
3.48; 𝑝 < .001. Puzzle: 𝑏 = 0.59, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (4994) = 5.99; 𝑝 < .001. Lying in bed: 𝑏 = −0.45,
𝑆𝐸 = 0.10; 𝑡 (4994) = −4.60; 𝑝 < .001). For the group project scenario, humans (Control:
𝑀 = 2.97, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.17; Treatment: 𝑀 = 3.45, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.23; 𝑏 = 0.44, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (5710) = 5.92;
𝑝 < .001) were more affected by imagining conflict than digital twins (Control: 𝑀 = 2.83,
𝑆𝐷 = 1.20; Treatment: 𝑀 = 2.97, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.18; 𝑏 = 0.10, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (5710) = 1.30; 𝑝 = .193).
Similarly, for the puzzle scenario, humans were more affected by imagining time pressure (Control:
𝑀 = 3.15, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.24; Treatment: 𝑀 = 4.37, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.34; 𝑏 = 1.21, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (5711) = 16.38;


                                                186
𝑝 < .001) than digital twins (Control: 𝑀 = 2.82, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.36; Treatment: 𝑀 = 3.45, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.52;
𝑏 = 0.62, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (5711.16) = 8.44; 𝑝 < .001). For the lying in bed scenario, digital
twins showed larger responses to imagining leg pain (Control: 𝑀 = 2.21, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.71; Treatment:
𝑀 = 2.78, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.94; 𝑏 = 0.57, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (5710) = 7.74; 𝑝 < .001) than humans (Control:
𝑀 = 2.59, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.47; Treatment: 𝑀 = 2.71, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.46; 𝑏 = 0.12, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07; 𝑡 (5710) = 1.65;
𝑝 = .100). See Figure 42.




             Figure 42: Effect of Imagined Scenarios on Digital Twins vs. Humans.


J.13.5   Discussion

Returning to each research question:

   1. Self-persuasion (36). When prompted to consider the other side, do digital twins abandon
      their attitudes more readily than their human counterparts?

   No. In fact, twins were less sensitive to considering a different point of view than humans
(although this could be explained by our slight wording modification between humans and twins).
Additional analyses suggest this also could be due to twins not reflecting the metacognition of their
human counterparts.

                                                187
   2. Scenarios. Do digital twins more “obediently” follow the instructions to imagine themselves
      in different scenarios, leading to more sensitivity to scenario manipulations?

   No. In fact, twins were less sensitive overall to these scenario manipulations than humans.
Looking at individual scenarios, twins were less sensitive than humans for imagined conflict and
time pressure, but more sensitive when imagining pain.

   3. Absurd Scenarios. Do digital twins “earnestly” respond to instructions that would be non-
      sensical to their human counterparts?

   No. If anything, humans were more sensitive to the instructions to forecast feelings in absurd
scenarios.


In sum, across all three task types, we do not find evidence supporting the possibility that because
twins obediently follow orders, they are more sensitive to survey instructions, such as ”consider
the alternative point of view” or ”imagine...” If anything, we find that humans, on average, respond
more to instructions in this survey than digital twins.




                                                 188
J.14     Privacy Preferences

J.14.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Consumers have privacy concerns regarding tracking and targeting in online advertising. In response
to such privacy concerns about personal data collection and use, the online advertising industry is
developing technically sophisticated privacy-enhancing technologies (PETs). On the premise that
consumers perceive their privacy to be violated differently under different advertising practices that
employ data tracking and targeting differently, we want to study how well their digital twins capture
these perceptions.
   Motivated by Google’s Privacy Sandbox initiative, we study six main practices of firms in online
advertising, labeled as different scenarios from A to F. For the status quo of behavioral targeting
(Scenario F), the degree of tracking is high because the consumer is tracked across websites and
the data leaves the local machine, and the degree of targeting is also high because the consumer
is targeted at the individual level. For the Individual-level Targeting PET (Scenario E), the degree
of tracking is low because although the consumer’s activity is tracked, the consumer’s data does
not leave the machine; however, the degree of targeting is high because the consumer receives
individually-targeted ads. For the Group-level Targeting PET (Scenario D), the degree of tracking
is low because although the consumer’s activity is tracked, the consumer’s data does not leave
the machine. In this case, the degree of targeting is at a medium level because the consumer is
profiled and receives ads targeted at a group level. For contextual targeting (Scenario C), the degrees
of tracking and targeting are both low, as the focal website only determines the individual-level
presence of the user on the website. The consumer is not tracked at the individual-level on the focal
website they are visiting and on other websites (i.e., no past behavioral browsing data is used for
profiling and targeting the user, and the only data used for targeting is the fact that the consumer
is present on the website); however, contextual targeting may still trigger privacy concerns (Bleier
2021). When untargeted ads are shown to consumers and they are not tracked (Scenario B), or
there is no tracking and no ads are shown to consumers (Scenario A), the degrees of tracking and
targeting are both zero. We expect that consumers’ average perceived privacy violations (PPVs)
will be in the order Scenarios F, E, D, C, B and A (with F having the highest PPV and A the lowest).
   The main question that we want to investigate is how PPV values compare for humans and


                                                 189
their digital twins in magnitude (in aggregate and individually) as well as in an ordinal sense (in
aggregate).


J.14.2   Methods

We measure consumers’ PPVs for the advertising practices in Scenarios A through F through an
online study with approximately 1,200 subjects (i.e., approximately 200 per condition) in the United
States. A human, allocated randomly to a scenario, is presented with a description of the scenario
and asked how much they perceive their privacy to be violated by this advertising practice. Later
the digital twin of this human is asked the exact same question.


J.14.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

For each of the 6 conditions, Table 25 reports: the human-twin sample size; mean PPV by human
respondents (along with the lower and upper bounds of the 95% confidence interval); mean PPV by
digital twins of human respondents (along with the lower and upper bounds of the 95% confidence
interval); Pearson r between human and twin PPVs; paired t-test on PPVs; and F-test on variances.
Table 26 provides the overall Spearman rho on the rank ordering of condition means. Twins
answered “1 - not at all” for all observations in Scenarios A, B and C, so correlations and certain
tests are undefined in these scenarios.

 Measure             A: No Ads, B: Untargeted C: Contextual D:               Group-    E:              F: Behaviora
                     No Tracking     Ads              Targeting        level PET       Individual-     Targeting
                                                                                       level PET

 N pairs             199             218              187              222             180             194
 Mean human          1.744           2.133            2.658            4.667           4.461           5.469
 Mean twin           1               1                1                2.712           2.817           4.603
 CI95 hu low         1.553           1.935            2.396            4.443           4.214           5.246
 CI95 hu high        1.935           2.331            2.919            4.890           4.709           5.692
 CI95 tw low         1               1                1                2.616           2.727           4.476
 CI95 tw high        1               1                1                2.807           2.907           4.731
 Pearson r                                                             0.014           -0.069          0.088

                                                190
Measure              A: No Ads, B: Untargeted C: Contextual D:                 Group-   E:            F: Behaviora
                     No Tracking      Ads              Targeting          level PET     Individual-   Targeting
                                                                                        level PET

p-val r                                                                   0.840         0.355         0.222
t stat               7.676            11.305           12.496             15.945        12.058        6.907
p-val t              0                0                0                  0             0             0
F var                                                                     5.446         7.569         3.070
p-val F                                                                   0             0             0

                                Table 25: Human and Twin Responses per Condition.




                                                                   rho                  p-value

Spearman rank corr                                                 0.88                 0.021

                         Table 26: Spearman rank correlation of condition means
                         from Human vs. Twins.



  The results of the experiments show the following:

   • The PPVs for human subjects are in the order hypothesized (with one deviation being that
     the mean PPV of Scenario D is higher than the mean PPV of Scenario E; however, these
     numbers are not statistically different accounting for the 95% CIs).

   • The PPVs for the digital twins are significantly lower in magnitude, i.e., digital twins have
     lower perceptions of privacy violations.

          – All twins give PPV values of 1 for Scenarios A, B and C, in which there is no tracking
            or targeting on past behavior.

          – The Pearson correlations between the PPVs of humans and their digital twins, when
            defined, are near zero.


                                                 191
         – The t-stats for the paired t-test between PPVs of humans and their digital twins show
            that these PPVs are significantly different.

         – The F-test of variances between PPVs of humans and their digital twins show that the
            variances in PPVs are significantly different.

    • While the PPVs of digital twins are significantly lower than the PPVs of humans, the rank
      ordering of the scenarios, based on average PPV, is similar for humans and digital twins, with
      a Spearman rank correlation of 0.88.


J.14.4   Discussion

The results of the study indicate that digital twins perceive their privacy to be violated less than
their human counterparts (as indicated by lower PPV scores for digital twins compared to humans).
The twins also do not do a good job of capturing heterogeneity in perceived privacy violations
(as indicated by almost zero correlations in PPV scores for digital twins compared to humans).
However, in aggregate, humans and their digital twins rank privacy violations similarly across
advertising practices that rely differently on tracking and targeting (as indicated by a high rank
correlation).




                                                 192
J.15     Preferences for Redistribution

J.15.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Building on the seminal work of (84), this study assesses the ability of digital twins to replicate
individuals’ preferences for redistribution and explores the mechanisms through which this replica-
tion may fail. Our instruments come from the General Social Science (GSS), a major social-science
survey in the U.S. Preferences for redistribution are measured through both a standard question
(asking whether the government should do everything possible to improve the standard of living
of all poor Americans) and a health-tax willingness question. In addition, mechanism variables
include fairness judgments, work-versus-luck beliefs, father’s education, and trust in others.
   Understanding how accurately digital twins mirror human attitudes on these topics is crucial for
policymakers, since public support for tax policy, welfare programs, and social-cohesion initiatives
depends directly on redistribution and trust levels, while beliefs about fairness and effort versus
luck inform education and labor-market reform.
   Our investigation proceeds in two stages. First, we examine whether digital twins systematically
differ from individuals in their preferences for redistribution. Second, we investigate whether any
observed discrepancies can be explained by the twins’ failure to replicate responses related to
socio-economic heritage (father’s education), fairness judgments, beliefs about the relative role of
effort versus luck in achieving success, and interpersonal trust. These have been shown to predict
redistribution preferences (84).


J.15.2   Methods

We administered a single, online questionnaire—closely modeled on core GSS items—to approxi-
mately 1,200 individuals and their matched digital twins. Respondents completed various questions;
those of interest for this analysis are presented below. We recoded every item so that higher numeric
values consistently reflected stronger endorsement (and set all “Don’t know” or non-substantive
responses to missing). Father’s education categories were converted to corresponding years of
schooling (10–18 years). Specifically:

   1. Redistribution 1 (Government Responsibility).
       “Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything possible to

                                                193
  improve the standard of living of all poor Americans; they are at Point 1 on the scale below.
  Other people think it is not the government’s responsibility, and that each person should take
  care of himself; they are at Point 5. Where would you place yourself on this scale, or haven’t
  you made up your mind on this?”

    (a) Response Options & Coding:

         i. 1 – I strongly agree the government should improve living standards → 5

         ii. 2 → 4

        iii. 3 – I agree with both answers → 3

        iv. 4 → 2

         v. 5 – I strongly agree people should take care of themselves → 1

        vi. Don’t know/No answer → missing

2. Redistribution 2 (Health-Care Tax Willingness).
  “How willing would you be to pay higher taxes to improve the level of health care for all
  people in the United States?”

    (a) Response Options & Coding:

         i. Very willing → 5

         ii. Fairly willing → 4

        iii. Neither willing nor unwilling → 3

        iv. Fairly unwilling → 2

         v. Very unwilling → 1

        vi. Don’t know/Can’t choose → missing

3. Fairness Judgment.
  “Which comes closer to your view of most people: (1) Most people would take advantage of
  you if they got the chance; (2) Most people would try to be fair; or (3) It depends?”

    (a) Response Options & Coding:


                                           194
         i. “Would take advantage of you” → 3

         ii. “It depends” → 2

        iii. “Would try to be fair” → 1

        iv. Don’t know → missing

4. Work vs. Luck.
  “Which comes closer to your view—that hard work MOST contributes to someone getting
  ahead in life, that luck or help from other people MOST contributes, or that hard work and
  luck are about equally important?”

    (a) Response Options & Coding:

         i. Hard work most important → 1

         ii. Hard work and luck equally important → 2

        iii. Luck or help from others most important → 3

        iv. Don’t know → missing

5. Interpersonal Trust.
  “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or that you can’t be too
  careful in dealing with people?”

    (a) Response Options & Coding:

         i. “Most people can be trusted” → 3

         ii. “Depends” → 2

        iii. “Can’t be too careful” → 1

        iv. Don’t know → missing

6. Father’s Education.
  “What is the highest level of education completed by your father?”

    (a) Response Options & Coding (years of schooling):

         i. Less than high school → 10

                                           195
                 ii. High school graduate → 12

                 iii. Some college, no degree → 13

                 iv. Associate’s degree → 14

                 v. College graduate / some postgraduate → 16

                 vi. Postgraduate degree → 18

               vii. Don’t know/No answer → missing

    After collecting the raw survey data, we removed any respondent whose completion time
fell below 50 percent of the sample median or who failed our attention-check prompt. We then
merged the cleaned human and twin datasets one-to-one on their unique identifiers, producing 1,163
matched pairs for each outcome. For each of our six measures, we calculated the Pearson correlation
(with Fisher confidence intervals) to gauge twin resemblance, carried out paired t-tests to compare
mean differences, performed F-tests to assess variance equality, and derived an accuracy index (1
minus the mean absolute difference divided by the variable’s range). Although not pre-registered,
we also generated side-by-side percent histograms of each response distribution to identify any
systematic replication discrepancies.


J.15.3     Results - Pre-registered Analyses


 Measure              Redistribution 1   Redistribution 2     Fairness          Work vs. Luck     Father’s Educa-   Trust in Others
                                                                                                  tion

 Accuracy             0.780              0.778                0.641             0.770             0.733             0.593
 Correlation          0.621              0.614                0.298             0.346             0.126             0.296
 Mean (Human)         3.55               3.27                 1.96              1.85              13.66             1.73
 Mean (Twin)          3.44               3.61                 1.71              1.70              12.09             2.22
 𝑡-test   (𝑝-value)   2.85 (𝑝 < .01)     –9.14                8.76 (𝑝 < .001)   7.65 (𝑝 < .001)   21.55             –16.74
 for means                               (𝑝 < .001)                                               (𝑝 < .001)        (𝑝 < .001)
 SD (Human)           1.28               1.36                 0.74              0.70              2.48              0.73
 SD (Twin)            1.65               1.53                 0.89              0.48              0.71              0.93
 𝐹-test (𝑝-value)     0.600              0.797                0.699             2.120             12.178            0.625 (𝑝 < .001
 for variances        (𝑝 < .001)         (𝑝 = .00012)         (𝑝 < .001)        (𝑝 < .001)        (𝑝 < .001)




                                                        196
 Measure           Redistribution 1   Redistribution 2    Fairness       Work vs. Luck   Father’s Educa-   Trust in Others
                                                                                         tion

 𝑛                 1153               1144                1151           1158            1163              1162

                                             Table 27: Human vs. Twin Responses.




     Table 27 shows the results from the pre-registered analysis. Digital twins capture the relative
ordering of individuals’ redistribution preferences reasonably well: both the standard five-point scale
measure (Redistribution 1) and the health-tax willingness question (Redistribution 2) yield strong
twin correlations (𝑟 ≈ .62). However, twins tend to slightly underestimate general redistribution
support (meanℎ = 3.55 vs. mean𝑡 = 3.44; 𝑡 = 2.85, 𝑝 = .0044) and overestimate willingness to
pay higher health taxes (meanℎ = 3.27 vs. mean𝑡 = 3.61; 𝑡 = −9.14, 𝑝 < .001). Accuracy scores
around .78 for each measure indicate that, on average, twins miss individual scores by nearly a full
point on the five-point scales. Moreover, significant variance differences (𝐹 = .60 and 𝐹 = .80,
both 𝑝 < .001) suggest that twins’ responses are more dispersed compared to human distributions.
Thus, while digital twins reflect who is relatively more or less supportive of redistribution, they
systematically misestimate absolute levels and spread.
     To understand why these mismatches occur, we examined additional constructs known to shape
redistribution attitudes (84). Twins poorly replicate socio-economic heritage—father’s education
shows a low correlation (𝑟 ≈ .13), a mean gap of over 1.5 years (𝑡 = 21.55, 𝑝 < .001), and a
sharply reduced variance (𝐹 = 12.18, 𝑝 < .001). Fairness judgments (𝑟 ≈ .30; accuracy ≈ .64)
and work-versus-luck beliefs (𝑟 ≈ .35; accuracy ≈ .77) similarly display moderate rank-order
similarity but pronounced mean and variance discrepancies. Interpersonal trust also diverges, with
twins overstating trust (mean𝑡 = 2.22 vs. meanℎ = 1.73; 𝑡 = 10.38, 𝑝 < .001). Because these
background factors and beliefs are important predictors of redistribution preferences, their imperfect
replication by digital twins likely underlies the systematic errors in predicting absolute levels of
support for redistribution.




                                                    197
J.15.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

We also present histograms of our outcomes to compare the response distributions of humans
and twins more effectively. As shown in Figure 43, twins exhibit more extreme redistribution
preferences, with the heavier tails driving the higher standard deviation observed above. They
are likewise more prone to overstate that others behave fairly and to report greater trust in fellow
individuals. Twins also more frequently endorse that both effort and luck matter equally for success.
Finally, nearly 100% of twins report that their father completed high school (12 years of education),
whereas the human sample shows a much more diverse educational distribution.




                       Figure 43: Comparison of Response Distributions.




                                                198
J.15.5   Discussion

In summary, although digital twins reliably reproduce the relative ranking of individuals’ redistri-
bution preferences, as evidenced by strong correlations on both the standard scale and health-tax
question, they consistently misestimate the absolute levels and dispersion of those preferences. Our
analysis suggests these systematic errors stem from twins’ failures to mirror key background factors
and beliefs: most notably socio-economic heritage (father’s education), fairness judgments, work-
versus-luck attributions, and interpersonal trust, which are themselves only moderately correlated
and exhibit pronounced mean and variance discrepancies. The heavier tails in twins’ redistribution
responses further underscore their tendency toward more extreme positions. For policymakers and
researchers considering the use of digital avatars to gauge public opinion, these findings highlight the
importance of refining the modeling of underlying socio-cognitive constructs; without accurately
capturing individuals’ formative experiences and normative beliefs, digital proxies will misrepre-
sent both the magnitude and variability of real-world attitudes, potentially leading to misguided
inferences about public support for tax, welfare, and social-cohesion initiatives.




                                                  199
J.16     Promiscuous Donors

J.16.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Political donations play a critical role in shaping electoral outcomes. They equip candidates with the
financial resources needed to compete in political races (e.g., (85,86)). They also function as signals
of support. Political parties often use donation counts as thresholds for unlocking institutional
backing and as a pre-requisite for qualifying for televised debates. In the present research, we
investigate the reputational consequences of a specific form of donation behavior: contributing to
both major political parties. We refer to individuals who donate to two parties as “promiscuous
donors” and we examine how they are perceived by others. Understanding how promiscuous donors
are perceived is important given the prevalence of this behavior. Analysis of 2024 Federal Election
Commission data reveals that at least 113,187 Americans made contributions to both parties during
the 2024 election cycle.
   Ex ante, it is unclear how individuals will evaluate those who donate to both political parties.
On one hand, promiscuous donors may be viewed favorably. Some scholars have argued that
political polarization has reached unsustainable levels (87), prompting a public desire for greater
bipartisanship and reconciliation. From this perspective, contributing to both parties could signal a
conciliatory stance, potentially enhancing reputational standing.
   On the other hand, several theoretical perspectives suggest that such behavior may incur repu-
tational costs. Partisan animosity has intensified in recent years, with Democrats and Republicans
expressing growing levels of dislike and distrust toward each other (88). Furthermore, emerging
research on receptiveness to opposing views (89) suggests that open-mindedness toward the other
side can backfire socially (90). If donors are seen as legitimizing or aligning with an ideologically
objectionable outgroup, their behavior may be perceived as disloyal or suspect, thereby leading to
reputational costs.


J.16.2   Methods

We recruited 799 human respondents on Prolific and their respective twins. This study used a rating-
based conjoint design (91). Conjoint is a study design used to determine how people value different
attributes (e.g., screen size, memory, color) that make up a product (e.g., a laptop). Participants in a


                                                  200
conjoint study are shown a series of trials, each showcasing a different version of the target product.
By varying different attribute levels of the product (e.g., a black vs. silver laptop) between trials
and measuring how consumers respond to different combinations of these attributes, managers can
quantify how much a given attribute (e.g., color) affects overall attitudes.
   Applying this approach, we had participants read 10 vignettes, each describing a target who
engaged in a different donation behavior. The donation behaviors included contributing solely to
the Republican Party, solely to the Democratic Party, to neither party, or to both parties. Our
primary focus was on the reputational consequences of donating to both parties. To this end, we
systematically varied the rationale provided for such behavior. Specifically, we compared conditions
in which no justification was given to those in which a self-interested or a values-based rationale was
offered. Self-interested justifications emphasized pragmatic benefits, such as attracting bipartisan
talent to one’s business or facilitating smoother relations with elected officials across party lines.
In contrast, values-based justifications highlighted ideological motivations, such as supporting
candidates with the best ideas regardless of party or promoting cross-party cooperation. Below is
a summary of the exact description used and the attribute level they correspond to:

    • Own Party or Opposing Party (coded relative to participant’s party affiliation; independent
      participants who rated these had their own category):

         – “I currently only donate to Republicans”

         – “I currently only donate to Democrats”

    • No donations: “I currently don’t donate to any politician”

    • Both: “I currently donate to both Democrats and Republicans”

    • Business Strategy: “I currently donate to both Democrats and Republicans so my business
      can work well with whoever wins”

    • Attract Talent: “I currently donate to both Democrats and Republicans because it helps me
      attract top talent for my business”

    • Common Grounds: “I currently donate to both Democrats and Republicans because I believe
      in working across the aisle to find common grounds”

                                                 201
    • Good Ideas: “I currently donate to both Democrats and Republicans because I support
      candidates who have good ideas, regardless of which party they come from”

   To enhance the generalizability of our findings, we systematically varied multiple dimensions
of the vignettes beyond donation behavior. This design enabled us to estimate the average effect of
donating to both parties across a range of contextual backgrounds. Specifically, we manipulated the
target’s political affiliation (Democrat vs. Republican), job (e.g., CEO of a publicly traded company
vs. founder of a fast-growing start-up), and donation history (e.g., history of prior donations vs.
first-time donors). This approach ensured that observed effects were not idiosyncratic to a single
type of target. Below is an example vignette used in the study:

      Imagine you meet someone named John at a neighborhood barbecue.

      John recently moved to your area. He is a Democrat. He is the CEO of a publicly traded
      company.

      During your conversation, the topic of donating to political campaigns comes up.

      John mentioned that he never used to donate to politicians.

      John then said to you:

      ”I currently donate to both Democrats and Republicans.”

   After reading the vignette, participants were asked to report their overall impressions of the
target: “Based on what John said, what’s your overall impression of him?” Participants reported
their attitudes on a nine-point bipolar scale, ranging from very unfavorable to very favorable. As a
reminder, each participant rated ten targets in total.


J.16.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

As preregistered, we regressed overall impression of the target on dummy variables of the manipu-
lated attributes and participant type (digital twin vs. human). Importantly, we included an interaction
between our focal manipulated attribute–donation behavior--and participant type. Standard errors
were clustered on the participant level to account for repeated measurement. More specifically, we



                                                 202
estimated the following regression:

                     𝑖, 𝑗 = 𝛼 + 𝛽®1 donation behavior𝑖, 𝑗
                  Impression

                                   + 𝛽2 participant type𝑖

                                   + 𝛽®3 donation behavior𝑖, 𝑗 × participant type𝑖
                                                                                     

                                   + 𝛽4 target party𝑖, 𝑗

                                   + 𝛽®5 history𝑖, 𝑗

                                   + 𝛽®6 job𝑖, 𝑗

We were interested in the vector of interactions 𝛽®3 . Significant interactions would suggest that hu-
mans and their digital twins differed in their reactions to current donation behavior. Non-significant
interactions would suggest no difference.




                                                   203
Figure 44: Reactions to target among humans and digital twins. Error bars denote 95% confidence
intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the participant level. The reference category is a target
who did not donate to either party. For legibility, the dummy variable indicating that an independent
participant rated a single-party donor is omitted from the figure but is included in the regression.


   Of the eight interaction terms, seven reached significance (𝑝s < .001). Both humans and digital
twins evaluated targets who donated to the opposing party more negatively than targets who made
no political donations (interaction 𝑏 = −0.32, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.27, 𝑡 = −1.18, 𝑝 = .24).
   Four of the seven significant interactions revealed divergent effects in magnitude between
human participants and their digital twins. Both humans and twins rated targets who donated to
both parties negatively relative to targets who did not donate to either party, but digital twins
were more positive in their evaluations (𝑏 = −0.11, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05, 𝑡 = −2.47, 𝑝 = .014) than
humans (𝑏 = −0.80, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09, 𝑡 = −9.09, 𝑝 < .001). Similarly, when targets provided self-

                                                204
interested reasons for donating to both parties, both humans and twins rated them more negatively
compared to targets who did not donate at all. However, twins were more positive. For example,
both humans and twins rated targets who donated to both parties because they wanted to be able to
work with whichever party is in power negatively, but twins were more positive (𝑏 = −0.76, 𝑆𝐸 =
0.05, 𝑡 = −15.86, 𝑝 < .001) than humans (𝑏 = −1.52, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.12, 𝑡 = −12.85, 𝑝 < .001).
The same pattern held for targets who donated to both parties because they wanted to attract top
talent to their business (humans: 𝑏 = −1.43, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.11, 𝑡 = −12.84, 𝑝 < .001 vs. twins:
𝑏 = −0.98, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05, 𝑡 = −19.56, 𝑝 < .001).
   The three remaining significant interactions revealed divergent effects in direction between
human participants and their digital twins. Human respondents rated targets who donated to their
own party more positively than those who did not donate (𝑏 = 0.60, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09, 𝑡 = 6.30, 𝑝 <
.001). In contrast, digital twins evaluated the same targets more negatively compared to those who
did not donate (𝑏 = −0.34, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.07, 𝑡 = −4.74, 𝑝 < .001). A similar divergence emerged in
evaluations of targets who donated to both parties for value-based reasons. Humans rated them the
same way they rated targets who did not donate to either party. However, twins rated them more
positively. Specifically, among humans, there was no significant difference between targets that
donated to both parties because they believe in working across the aisle to find common ground and
targets who did not donate (𝑏 = −0.07, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.10, 𝑡 = −0.68, 𝑝 = .50). However, twins rated
the former more positively than targets who did not donate (𝑏 = 0.66, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05, 𝑡 = 12.61, 𝑝 <
.001). The same pattern held for targets who donated to both parties because they wanted to support
the best ideas regardless of which party they came from (humans: 𝑏 = 0.06, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.11, 𝑡 =
0.56, 𝑝 = .58 vs. twins: 𝑏 = 0.76, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05, 𝑡 = 15.12, 𝑝 < .001).


J.16.4   Discussion

How do people evaluate promiscuous donors (i.e., targets who donate to both parties)? Our results
indicate that, compared to those who do not donate to politics at all, those who donate to both parties
are perceived more negatively. This result is consistent with recent research on the reputational
costs of receptiveness to opposing views (90). Interestingly, the reputational costs of promiscuous
donation are particularly salient when the reason behind donating to both parties is self-interest
(e.g., to attract the best talent to one’s business or to make sure that one’s business can work

                                                 205
with whichever party wins) and are somewhat weaker when the reason is more value-based (e.g.,
believing in bridging divides or that good ideas should be supported regardless of which party they
come from).
   How do humans and their digital twins compare when judging the donation behavior of others?
Across more than 7,000 conjoint judgments, human respondents penalized promiscuous donors,
especially when the behavior appeared motivated by self-interest (e.g., cultivating access or recruit-
ing talent). In contrast, digital twins were less punitive (sometimes even favorable) toward the very
same targets.
   What might drive these differences? One explanation is that language models are trained to
discount signals of intergroup conflict. Hence, a cross-party donation that humans interpret as a
collaboration with the enemy is read by the model as pragmatic or even positive as it shows a
willingness to reach across divides. A second, complementary account centers on affect: if twins
lack the visceral emotions that energize partisan animus, they down-regulate the reputational costs
of interacting with the political out-group. Further research on how digital twins compare to humans
in matters of social cognition would be worthwhile.


J.16.5   Appendix - Regression Tables


                                                                                     (1) rating

 Twins                                                                               0.411***
                                                                                     (0.0694)
 Own Party=1                                                                         0.502***
                                                                                     (0.0915)
 Opposing Party=1                                                                    -2.632***
                                                                                     (0.127)
 Both Parties=1                                                                      -0.802***
                                                                                     (0.0883)
 Business Strategy=1                                                                 -1.509***
                                                                                     (0.116)
 Attract Talent=1                                                                    -1.425***


                                                 206
                                                  (1) rating

                                                  (0.110)
Common Grounds=1                                  -0.0553
                                                  (0.0984)
Good Ideas=1                                      0.0768
                                                  (0.106)
Partisan Donation (Independent)=1                 -1.682***
                                                  (0.243)
Twins # Own Party=1                               -0.745***
                                                  (0.117)
Twins # Opposing Party=1                          -0.700***
                                                  (0.153)
Twins # Both Parties=1                            0.691***
                                                  (0.0994)
Twins # Business Strategy=1                       0.739***
                                                  (0.124)
Twins # Attract Talent=1                          0.435***
                                                  (0.119)
Twins # Common Grounds=1                          0.700***
                                                  (0.110)
Twins # Good Ideas=1                              0.665***
                                                  (0.115)
Twins # Partisan Donation (Independent)=1         -0.315
                                                  (0.267)
Target: Own Party                                 0.311***
                                                  (0.0865)
Target: Opposing Party                            -0.0112
                                                  (0.0879)
Start-up Founder                                  -0.112***


                                            207
                                                                          (1) rating

                                                                          (0.0369)
CEO                                                                       -0.197***
                                                                          (0.0378)
No Donations                                                              0.0808**
                                                                          (0.0318)
Both                                                                      0.119***
                                                                          (0.0313)
Observations                                                              15,980
𝑅2                                                                        0.311
Adjusted 𝑅 2                                                              0.310

                    Table 28: Regression results: pooled sample.




                                  (1) Ratings Humans               (2) Ratings Twins

Own Party                         0.598***                         -0.345***
                                  (0.0949)                         (0.0728)
Opposing Party                    -2.762***                        -3.193***
                                  (0.130)                          (0.0839)
Both Parties                      -0.804***                        -0.111**
                                  (0.0884)                         (0.0450)
Business Strategy                 -1.521***                        -0.756***
                                  (0.118)                          (0.0477)
Attract Talent                    -1.433***                        -0.983***
                                  (0.112)                          (0.0502)
Common Grounds                    -0.0684                          0.656***
                                  (0.100)                          (0.0520)
Good Ideas                        0.0598                           0.758***
                                  (0.108)                          (0.0501)

                                      208
                                       (1) Ratings Humans              (2) Ratings Twins

Partisan Donation (Independent)        -1.580***                       -2.073***
                                       (0.255)                         (0.0925)
Target: Own Party                      0.315*                          0.338***
                                       (0.182)                         (0.0582)
Target: Opposing Party                 0.218                           -0.224***
                                       (0.183)                         (0.0606)
Start-up Founder                       -0.0795                         -0.146***
                                       (0.0633)                        (0.0375)
CEO                                    -0.161**                        -0.231***
                                       (0.0662)                        (0.0360)
No Donations                           0.117**                         0.0454
                                       (0.0571)                        (0.0278)
Both                                   0.127**                         0.111***
                                       (0.0565)                        (0.0262)
Observations                           7,990                           7,990
𝑅2                                     0.176                           0.546
Adjusted 𝑅 2                           0.175                           0.545

                     Table 29: Regression results: split by humans vs. twins.




                                           209
J.17     Quantitative Intuition

J.17.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

This study evaluates whether digital twins trained from large language models (LLMs) can ac-
curately replicate individual responses on a newly developed psychometric instrument measuring
Quantitative Intuition (QI) (92). The QI scale assesses the respondent’s own analytical and intuitive
mindsets through 38 self-report items in addition 16 items measuring individuals’ perceptions of
their organization’s analytical and intuitive orientations.
   We test two core questions: First, can digital twins accurately reproduce individual human
responses to the QI scale? Second, do digital twins match human participants on average scores
for the quantitative (Q) and intuitive (I) mindset dimensions? Because the scale was developed in
tandem with this study and was not available during LLM training, this provides a strong test of
digital twins’ ability to predict out-of-sample psychometric responses.


J.17.2   Methods

We recruited human participants from Prolific who were part of a larger digital twin study and
collected matched responses from their corresponding digital twins. Invitations were sent to 2,000
participants from the original twin cohort; 1,435 individuals responded to the survey. Following pre-
registered exclusion criteria, we removed 108 respondents who failed at least one of two attention
checks, 8 respondents who “straightlined” (i.e., provided the same response across items 32–38
of the scale), and 1 respondent who completed the survey in under 150 seconds (mean response
time was 789 seconds with a standard deviation of 457 seconds). The final sample included 1,323
respondents.
   Participants completed 38 self-assessment items measuring their individual Quantitative In-
tuition (QI) mindset, followed by 16 items assessing their perception of their current or former
organization’s QI mindset. In addition, participants responded to two behavioral QI questions—one
closed-ended and one open-ended—designed to capture willingness to “guestimate” and synthesize
information. These behavioral items serve as external validity checks for the QI scale.
   To explore individual differences in the QI scores, we examined correlations between QI scores
and demographic and psychological variables collected as part of the broader digital twin survey.


                                                 210
   Digital twins were prompted to complete the same set of items as their human counterparts,
simulating how the participant might respond.
   We derived individual QI scores using two approaches: 1) Simple averaging: we computed the
mean of the first 19 items as a quantitative mindset score (Q), and the mean of the next 19 items as
an intuitive mindset score (I), and 2) Factor analysis: we conducted an exploratory factor analysis
with two factors, which naturally aligned with the quantitative and intuitive dimensions. Factor
scores from this model were used as alternative QI measures.
   We then compare the individual, simple average and factor analysis scores of the human
respondents with those of the digital twins.


J.17.3   Results - Pre-registered Analyses

As pre-registered we compared the actual QI score of the Prolific respondents with the QI score
of their digital twins. We do so both at the individual question level and for the average of the
individual and organizational quantitative and intuitive scores.
   Comparing the average score of the human responses and the digital twins
   Comparing the correlation between the average (or factor) scores between the actual respondents
and the digital twins for the individual and organizational quantitative and intuitive scores we find
that overall the digital twins answers are closer to the actual respondents answers for the individual
relative to the organizational skill both for the average quantitative and intuitive scores and for the
factor analysis scores.
   The Cronbach’s 𝛼 for the Q and I individual scales for the human respondents are 0.788 and
0.753, respectively, suggesting acceptable levels of agreement for items in the scale. Interestingly,
the digital twin mimicked similar or even higher levels of agreement for items in the scale, with
Cronbach’s 𝛼 of 0.776 and 0.866 for the Q and I individual scales.
   Comparing the means and standard deviations of the scale scores between the humans and and
digital twins shows that the means are quite similar, but the digital twins had consistently lower
variance in the responses across respondents. A possible reason for that is that the digital twins are
still regressing to some overall LLM mean.




                                                 211
 Scale                                                       Human                         Digital Twin

                               Mean                          3.579                         3.573
 Q Ind.
                               STD                           0.451                         0.355
                               Mean                          3.478                         3.713
 I Ind.
                               STD                           0.412                         0.394
                               Mean                          3.580                         3.014
 Q Org.
                               STD                           0.643                         0.418
                               Mean                          3.219                         3.479
 I Org.
                               STD                           0.486                         0.280

                          Table 30: Quantitative and Intuitive Scales: Human vs. Dig-
                          ital Twin



    Correlations between the human responses and the digital twins
    Looking at the correlations between the individual-level QI scale responses and those of the
digital twins, we find a moderately strong correlation between the responses to the 19 quantitative
questions (𝑟 = 0.513, 𝑝 < .001) and the 19 individual scores (𝑟 = 0.481, 𝑝 < .001), with an overall
correlation of 𝑟 = 0.46. Thus, at the individual level the digital twins are capable of mimicking
the human response to QI to a moderate extent. The correlations between the digital twins and the
human responses for the organizational QI scores are much lower, though statistically significant
(𝑟 quantitative, org = 0.252, 𝑝 < .001 and 𝑟 intuitive, org = 0.196, 𝑝 < .001). This is to be expected as the
original questions used to build the digital twins focused on the individuals themselves rather than
on the organization they work/worked for.




                                                    212
                                            Figure 45:


   Finally, looking at the individual questions we find a positive and significant (after Bonferroni
correction for multiple tests) correlation at the 95% level between the human digital twins scores
for 35 out of the 38 individual QI questions. For the organizational QI questions, we find a positive
and significant (after Bonferroni correction for multiple tests) correlation at the 95% level between
the human and digital twin responses for 11 out of 16 questions. We did not find any significant

                                                213
and negative correlations between the human and digital twin responses for any of the questions.
   We did not find a statistically significant relationship between the QI scores for either the
willingness to guestimate questions or the ability to synthesize scores. However, we found an
interesting result with respect to the ability of the digital twins to answer the QI behavioral questions.
In a close ended question, we gave respondents some pieces of information and challenged them to
address the problem by guestimation. The digital twins chose to guestimate, which is the normative
answer for the guestimation question, 99.9% of the times (only one twin did not choose the normative
response), whereas for the humans only 59.4% were inclined to guestimate. The difference between
the human and digital twin responses is statistically significant (𝑝 < .001).
   In an open-ended question, we asked respondents to explain the situation for a struggling
company based on data, where the normative QI response would be to synthesize the information
rather than mainly summarize it. We asked GPT-4o mini to classify each human or digital twin
response as a summary or a synthesis. A research assistant independently classified 20 responses
and found that their classification perfectly matched with those of ChatGPT. We found a similar
result to those of the willingness to guesstimate for the ability to synthesize. Whereas 99.8% of the
digital twins synthesized the information, only 71.5% of human respondents replied with the QI
normative response to synthesize. The difference between the human and digital twin responses is
statistically significant (𝑝 < .001).
   Thus, while the digital twins are capable of moderately following human responses to the QI
scale, when it comes to mimicking human behavior questions, they tend to overexhibit behavior
that is consistent with the normative QI mindset.


J.17.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

We also analyzed the relationship between the Q and I scores and the demographic and individual
characteristics collected in the first phase of the digital twins study. Specifically, we calculated
the correlations between the average individual Q and I scores and each of the scales measured
in that initial phase. Focusing on individual rather than organizational QI scores, we report only
the correlations that are statistically significant at the 95% confidence level after applying the
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.
   Several interesting results emerge.

                                                  214
   1. The individual mindset score (I) is statistically significantly correlated with the following
      scales at the 95% level:

        1. Regulatory Focus (Fellner et al. 2017) - r=0.452

        2. Openness (John & Srivastava, 1999) - r=0.428

        3. Consumer Need for Uniqueness (Ruvio et al., 2008) - r=0.379

        4. Self monitoring (Lennox & Wolfe, 1984) - 0.352

        5. Agentic (Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012), r=0.306

        6. Extraversion (John & Srivastava, 1999), r=0.285

        7. Need for Cognition (Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984), r=0.258

        8. Green (Haws, Winterich, & Naylor, 2014) - r=0.213

        9. Maximization (Nenkov et al., 2002), r=0.212

       10. Overconfidence (Dean & Ortoleva, 2019) - r=0.198

       11. The Horizontal and Vertical Individualism and Collectivism scales (Triandis & Gelfand,
           1998) - r=0.169, r=0.182. r=0.217. r=0.125.

       12. Communion (Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012), r=0.158

       13. Basic Empathy (Carre et al., 2013) - r=0.149

       14. Minimalism (Wilson & Bellezza, 2021), r=0.106

       15. Total performance on the cognitive test - r= -0.113.

       16. Cognitive Reflection Test 2 (Thomson and Oppenheimer 2016) - r= -0.116

   Thus, individuals who score high on having an intuitive mindset also tend to score high
on regulatory focus and openness—traits that are correlated with greater emotional awareness,
creativity, and unconventionality. They also tend to seek uniqueness, display overconfidence, be
extraverted, agentic, and self-aware. While they perform well on communication measures, they
tend to score lower on cognitive tests. Of particular interest is the negative correlation with the
Cognitive Reflection Test 2 (CRT-2), which assesses individuals’ ability to override intuitive (System
1) responses in favor of more deliberate (System 2) reasoning. This negative correlation aligns with

                                                 215
our expectations: a high intuitive mindset score on our scale should correspond to greater reliance
on System 1 processing. This finding provides a compelling validation of our scale.

   2. The analytical/quantitative mindset score (Q) is statistically significantly correlated with the
      following scales at the 95% level:

        1. Need for Cognition (Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984) - r=0.380

        2. Regulatory Focus (Fellner et al. 2017) - r=0.342

        3. Conscientiousness (John & Srivastava, 1999) - r=0.320

        4. Openness (John & Srivastava, 1999) - r=0.259

        5. Self Monitoring (Lennox & Wolfe, 1984) - 0.248

        6. Minimalism (Wilson & Bellezza, 2021), r=0.237

        7. Green (Haws, Winterich, & Naylor, 2014) - r=0.215

        8. The Horizontal and Vertical Individualism and Collectivism scales (Triandis & Gelfand,
           1998) - r=0.223, r=0.195. r=0.210. r=0.153.

        9. Agentic score (Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012) - r=0.206

       10. Numeracy - r=0.170

       11. Maximization (Nenkov et al., 2002), r=0.162

       12. Consumer Need for Uniqueness (Ruvio et al., 2008) - r=0.142

       13. Overconfidence (Dean & Ortoleva, 2019) - r=0.140

       14. Extraversion (John & Srivastava, 1999), r=0.136

       15. Financial literacy (Johnson, Meier, Toubia 2018) - r=0.134

       16. Agreeableness (John & Srivastava, 1999) - r=0.132

       17. Communion score (Trapnell & Paulhus, 2012), r= 0.103

       18. Self Concept Clarity (Campbell et al., 1996) - r=0.099

       19. Social desirability(Crowne & Marlowe, 1960) - r= 0.097

       20. Depression - r= -0.119

                                                216
         21. Neuroticism(John & Srivastava, 1999) - r= -0.183

   Several measures that are statistically significantly and positively correlated with the intuitive
mindset scale (I) are also correlated with the analytical mindset scale (Q). These include need for
cognition, regulatory focus, openness, self-monitoring, individualism, collectivism, minimalism,
environmental concern (“green”), agentic traits, communication skills, and overconfidence.
   On the other hand, several individual characteristics appear to be uniquely associated with
scoring high on the analytical (Q) scale. Individuals who scored high on the analytics mindset
questions tend to also score high on conscientiousness, a trait often linked to organization and
discipline, as well as on numeracy and financial literacy, which reflect core quantitative skills.
They also score higher on agreeableness, social desirability, and self-concept clarity, and lower
on neuroticism and depression. Additionally, an analytical mindset is positively and significantly
associated with being male and having a higher income.


J.17.5    Discussion

Overall, we first validated the QI scale by running it on a large sample of respondents, identifying a
meaningful two-factor structure that captures both an analytical mindset and an intuitive mindset.
We also found meaningful and expected relationships between the QI scale and a set of individual
characteristics—such as higher numeracy, financial literacy, and conscientiousness among individ-
uals with an analytical mindset, and a stronger preference for System 1 processing among those
with an intuitive mindset.
   In the digital twins analysis, we found a moderate correlation (around 0.5) between human
responses to the individual QI scale and those of their digital twins, and a weaker relationship
(correlation of 0.2-0.25) between human responses and their digital twins’ assessments of the
QI score of the organization they work/ed for, possibly due to the absence of questions about
the individual’s workplace in the digital twin’s construction. We also observed that digital twin
responses underestimated the variance present in the actual data, possibly suggesting that the digital
twin reflects a weighted combination of the fine-tuned individual data and the pre-trained global
LLM output.
   Finally, while the digital twins did a modest job of capturing the QI scale, they failed to mimic


                                                 217
responses to the two QI behavior questions. The digital twins tended to consistently select the
normative, high-QI behavior much more frequently than humans did.


J.18       Targeting Fairness

J.18.1     Main Questions/Hypotheses

Companies commonly target their advertisements based on demographic characteristics, such as
race or gender. Yet recent work has found that people often view the decision to target to be less
fair than advertising broadly to the general population (93). In this sub-study, we aim to replicate
this pattern with human participants, and test whether their digital twins indicate similar fairness
ratings.


J.18.2     Methods

We opened the study to 400 human participants on Prolific, and 357 passed the screener and com-
pleted it. The study was subsequently run on their 357 digital twins, for a total of 714 participants.
Participants and their corresponding digital twins were randomly assigned to the same condition in
a two-cell (broad vs. targeted) between-subjects design.
    All participants first read: “A snack foods company has developed a new line of snacks. Initial
testing showed that, due to the taste and texture profile of the snacks, the snacks are better suited
to the preferences of their female customers.” In the broad condition, participants next read: “Even
though they believe the snacks are best suited to their female customers, they will advertise the
snacks broadly to the general public.” In the targeted condition, participants next read: “Because
they believe the snacks are best suited to their female customers, they will advertise the snacks to
women directly.” Finally, participants rated fairness: “How fair is this advertising plan?” (“Not at
all fair” = 1; “Very fair” = 9).


J.18.3     Results - Pre-registered Analyses

We conducted a two-way ANOVA with targeting condition (broad vs. targeted) and participant
type (human vs. digital twin) as the independent variables, and fairness ratings as the dependent
variable. We found a significant main effect of targeting condition (𝐹 (1, 713) = 69.07, 𝑝 < .001),

                                                 218
but no significant effects of participant type (𝐹 (1, 713) = 0.05, 𝑝 = .823) or their interaction
(𝐹 (1, 713) = 1.57, 𝑝 = .211), indicating that, at an aggregate level, the digital twins rated fairness
similarly to the humans. Pairwise comparisons confirm that for humans, the decision to target
was rated as less fair (𝑀 = 6.38, 𝑆𝐷 = 2.17) than advertising broadly (𝑀 = 7.47, 𝑆𝐷 =
1.83, 𝐹 (1, 710) = 45.72, 𝑝 < .001), and for the digital twins, targeting was also rated as less
fair (𝑀 = 7.30, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.78) than advertising broadly (𝑀 = 6.50, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.80, 𝐹 (1, 710) =
24.92, 𝑝 < .001).


J.18.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

Although not part of our pre-registered plan, a notable observation stood out in the analysis: the
variance among the digital twins was lower than for the humans. In particular, for the digital twins,
99% of responses used the upper end of the scale (5–9), compared with only 87% of responses for
the human participants (𝜒2 (1) = 25.27, 𝑝 < .001). Examining the responses closest to the mean
(i.e., respondents answering “7”), 63% of the digital twins provided that response, compared with
20% of human participants (𝜒2 (1) = 136.59, 𝑝 < .001). The overall correlation between human
participants and their digital twin was weak but significant (𝑟 = .13, 𝑝 = .012).


J.18.5   Discussion

At the aggregate level, the digital twins closely matched human judgments of the perceived fairness
of demographic targeting, replicating the finding that it is viewed as less fair than broad targeting
and producing similar average ratings across conditions. However, the twins’ responses were more
clustered around the mean, whereas human participants were more likely to use the whole scale.


J.19     User Behavior with Recommendation Systems

J.19.1   Main Questions/Hypotheses

Modern machine learning and AI-based recommendation systems are data-driven, generating per-
sonalized recommendations from a user’s previous interactions. Often, platforms make the assump-
tion that a user’s engagement with a particular piece of content is indicative of their utility for the



                                                 219
content. However, a recent online behavioral experiment has shown that users may behave strategi-
cally and alter their engagement to influence the content they get recommended in the future (94).
For example, a user on a music platform may skip past a “guilty pleasure” song that they like,
because they are worried that the recommendation algorithm will recommend too many similar
songs later.
   In this work, we study self-reported usage of online platforms, beliefs and preferences about
recommendation systems, and strategization behavior among humans and their digital twins. We
test whether digital twins exhibit similar self-reported behavior as their human counterparts.


J.19.2   Methods

We recruited 598 human participants from Prolific and their digital twins. Of the human participants,
591 passed the attention check, resulting in 591 human subjects and 591 digital twins. Participants
are then asked to self-report their usage, beliefs, and preferences regarding Netflix and Tiktok.
   We assess knowledge about the platform’s recommendation algorithm by asking “How do you
think [platform] recommends content? Please check all that apply,” where knowledge corresponds
to selecting the answer “By analyzing what content you’ve interacted with in the past” from a menu
of options.
   We consider two types of strategization, with explicit user feedback and implicit user feedback:

    • For strategization with explicit user feedback, we ask “When you are on [platform], do you
      give a thumbs-up (or thumbs-down) for any of the following reasons? Please check ALL that
      apply.” We say that the user strategizes with explicit feedback if they check “Because you
      want [platform] to show you more (or fewer) content like it.”

    • For strategization with implicit user feedback, we ask “How do you typically react if [platform]
      shows you content or advertisements that you don’t want to see in the future? Please check
      ALL that apply.” We say that the user strategizes with implicit feedback if they answer “Scroll
      past it faster than I otherwise would” or “change how I interact with other content.”

   For preference for user controls in recommendation systems, we ask “What controls, if any,
would you like to have over their recommendation systems? Please check ALL that apply” with a


                                                220
menu of options. We count the number of options selected other than ”No control: let the algorithm
work automatically.”


J.19.3   Results – Pre-registered Analyses

To analyze the differences between human participants and their AI-generated digital twins, we
conducted a series of paired-samples 𝑡-tests for our pre-registered hypotheses. This statistical test
compares the mean scores of two related groups—in this case, each human participant and their
corresponding digital twin. This approach allows us to precisely assess systematic differences in
their responses for two platforms: TikTok (𝑁 = 234) and Netflix (𝑁 = 392).
   Platform Usage Patterns
   Self-reported platform usage differed dramatically between humans and their digital twins. For
TikTok, humans most frequently reported using the platform “a few hours every month” (35.5%)
or “a few hours every week” (33.8%). In stark contrast, the majority of their digital twins reported
“Never” using the platform (51.3%).
   A similar, though less pronounced, pattern emerged for Netflix. The majority of human partic-
ipants reported using Netflix “a few hours every week” (56.1%), whereas their digital twins were
more evenly split between “a few hours every week” (60.2%) and “a few hours every day” (31.1%).
While a paired 𝑡-test on the underlying ranked data indicated a significant difference (TikTok:
𝑡 (233) = −25.31, 𝑝 < .001; Netflix: 𝑡 (391) = −8.35, 𝑝 < .001), we emphasize that this test was
performed on ordinal data.
   Knowledge About Recommendation Algorithms
   When asked if they believe platforms use past interactions to recommend content, digital twins
were significantly more likely to endorse this idea than their human counterparts. For TikTok,
digital twins (𝑀 = 0.996, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.065) endorsed this belief more strongly than humans (𝑀 =
0.902, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.298, 𝑡 (233) = −4.92, 𝑝 < .001). This finding was replicated on Netflix, where
digital twins (𝑀 = 0.997, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.051) again were more likely to agree with this mechanism than
humans (𝑀 = 0.931, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.254, 𝑡 (391) = −5.27, 𝑝 < .001). The correlations between digital
twin and human responses were 𝑟 = 0.20 and 𝑟 = 0.19 for TikTok and Netflix, respectively.
   Presence of Content Strategization
   We measured strategic interaction with platform algorithms using two distinct questions. On

                                                221
both measures, digital twins reported engaging in significantly more strategic behavior.
   First, when asked if they use “thumbs-up” or similar features to influence future recommen-
dations, digital twins on TikTok (𝑀 = 0.782, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.414) reported doing so more than humans
(𝑀 = 0.530, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.500, 𝑡 (233) = −8.86, 𝑝 < .001). The effect was even more pronounced for
Netflix, with twins (𝑀 = 0.995, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.071) reporting far more strategic use of this feature than
humans (𝑀 = 0.543, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.499, 𝑡 (391) = −17.94, 𝑝 < .001). The correlations between digital
twin and human responses were 𝑟 = 0.56 and 𝑟 = 0.08 for TikTok and Netflix, respectively.
   Second, when asked how they react to undesirable content, digital twins were more likely to
report taking strategic action (e.g., scrolling past faster, changing interaction patterns). This was true
for TikTok, where twins (𝑀 = 0.957, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.203) scored higher than humans (𝑀 = 0.509, 𝑆𝐷 =
0.501, 𝑡 (233) = −13.77, 𝑝 < .001). The pattern held for Netflix, with twins (𝑀 = 0.939, 𝑆𝐷 =
0.240) again reporting more strategic reactions than humans (𝑀 = 0.311, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.464, 𝑡 (391) =
−25.67, 𝑝 < .001). The correlations between digital twin and human responses were 𝑟 = 0.21 and
𝑟 = 0.17 for TikTok and Netflix, respectively.
   Preference for User Controls
   The largest divergence between the two groups was observed in their stated preference for
controls over recommendation systems. Digital twins expressed a desire for a significantly greater
number of controls than humans. On TikTok, twins (𝑀 = 4.880, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.374) selected far more
control options than their human counterparts (𝑀 = 1.991, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.352, 𝑡 (233) = −32.49, 𝑝 <
.001). The result was similarly stark for Netflix, where twins (𝑀 = 4.888, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.361) also desired
significantly more controls than humans (𝑀 = 1.862, 𝑆𝐷 = 1.248, 𝑡 (391) = −47.50, 𝑝 < .001).
The correlations between digital twin and human responses were 𝑟 = 0.11 and 𝑟 = 0.10 for TikTok
and Netflix, respectively.


J.19.4   Results - Additional Analyses (Non-Preregistered)

A key observation, consistent across all the metrics reported above, is that human responses are
noisier than digital twin responses, with the latter consistently showing smaller standard deviations.
   Additionally, we find differences in how humans and digital twins respond to social pres-
sure, perhaps surprisingly with digital twins being more responsive to social pressure across both
platforms.

                                                  222
   We ask participants whether they “watch, listen to, or ‘like’ content that [they] do not particularly
like just to be polite or support the creator.” Humans reported low rates of this behavior on TikTok
(𝑀 = 0.11, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.25) and Netflix (𝑀 = 0.07, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.26), compared to those of their digital
twins on TikTok (𝑀 = 0.25, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.44) and Netflix (𝑀 = 0.23, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.42).
   Similarly, we asked participants whether they click “like” content that [they] do not particularly
like due to social pressure, and humans reported lower rates on TikTok (𝑀 = 0.04, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.19)
and Netflix (𝑀 = 0.04, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.19) than their digital twins on TikTok (𝑀 = 0.18, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.39)
and Netflix (𝑀 = 0.14, 𝑆𝐷 = 0.35).


J.19.5   Discussion

We find that human and digital twin behavior differ significantly across a broad range of self-
reported metrics on platform usage, knowledge about recommendation algorithms, strategization,
preference for controls, and social behavior. The digital twins self report more platform usage, are
more aware of how recommendation algorithms work, are more likely to strategize, prefer more
control over their algorithms, and are more prone to changing their behavior on recommendation
systems due to social pressure.




                                                 223
