            LLM Agents Grounded in Self-Reports Enable General-Purpose
                                  Simulation of Individuals

 Authors: Joon Sung Park*1, Carolyn Q. Zou1,2, Jonne Kamphorst*7, Niles Egan1, Aaron Shaw2,
     Benjamin Mako Hill3, Carrie Cai4, Meredith Ringel Morris5, Percy Liang1, Robb Willer6,
                                             Michael S. Bernstein1

Affiliations:
    1Computer Science Department, Stanford University; Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
    2Department of Communication Studies, Northwestern University; Evanston, IL, 60208,
    USA.
    3Department of Communication, University of Washington; Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
    4Google DeepMind; Mountain View, CA 94043, USA.
    5Google DeepMind; Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
    6Department of Sociology, Stanford University; Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
    7Sciences Po; Paris, 75007, France.
    *Corresponding authors

Abstract:

Machine learning can predict human behavior well when substantial structured data and
well-defined outcomes are available, but these models are typically limited to specific outcomes
and cannot readily be applied to new domains. We test whether large language models (LLMs)
can support a more general-purpose approach by building person-specific simulations (i.e.,
"generative agents") grounded in self-report data. Using data from a diverse national sample of
1,052 Americans, we build agents from (i) two-hour, semi-structured interviews (elicited using
the American Voices Project interview schedule), (ii) structured surveys (the General Social
Survey and Big Five personality inventory), or (iii) both sources combined. On held-out General
Social Survey items, agent accuracy reached 83% (interview only), 82% (surveys only), and 86%
(combined) of participants' two-week test-retest consistency, compared with agents prompted
only with individuals' demographics (74%). Agents predicted personality traits and behaviors in
experiments with similar accuracy, and reduced disparities in accuracy across racial and
ideological groups relative to demographics-only baselines. Together, these results show that
LLMs agents grounded in rich qualitative or quantitative self-report data can support
general-purpose simulation of individuals across outcomes, without requiring task-specific
training data.

                                                                      1
General-purpose simulation of human attitudes and behavior--in which simulated individuals
respond realistically across social, political, and informational contexts--promises a versatile
tool for social and behavioral science (1-8). Realizing these potential applications, however,
requires agent architectures that can produce human-like attitudes and behaviors while remaining
flexible and applicable across a range of domains, tasks, and settings. Recent machine-learning
approaches to predicting human behaviors and outcomes have achieved strong performance in
domains with abundant structured data (e.g., 9). Yet these approaches depend on extensive,
in-domain structured data that are costly to collect and tailored to a specific outcome, making
them difficult to adapt to new contexts or outcomes. These constraints place important limits on
person-level predictive modeling for many of the settings social scientists and policymakers care
about, where the background information on individuals that is needed is unavailable.

Large language models (LLMs) offer a new path forward because they provide a domain-general
interface linking person-specific information and a diverse range of application contexts. Given a
description of an individual, the same underlying model can be queried across many outcomes
without the need to train new outcome-specific predictive models (10). Realizing the promise of
this approach, however, depends on effectively grounding the model with reliable information
about specific individuals. Social scientists most often elicit background information on
individuals via self-reports, using one of two forms: open-ended interviews and structured survey
batteries. Each method has distinct advantages and limitations for informing prediction. Here, we
compare three primary approaches to grounding LLM-based generative agents: (1) in-depth,
semi-structured interview responses collected using the American Voices Project interview
schedule; (2) structured survey batteries drawn from the General Social Survey and the Big Five
personality inventory; and (3) the combination of interview and survey inputs.

We evaluate these generative agents at the relevant unit of analysis, the individual, comparing
predicted responses with participants' actual responses across a range of outcomes. Our
framework is designed to reduce LLMs' established tendency to rely on demographic stereotypes
by grounding predictions in individuals' self-reports (11-13). We assess performance across
canonical social-science instruments and decision contexts, including survey measures of
attitudes and behaviors, personality inventories, behavioral games, and behavior in randomized
controlled trials. Because most human attitudes and behaviors are measured with nontrivial
within-person noise, raw prediction accuracy is unlikely to reach 100%, and is not directly
comparable across different instruments. We therefore benchmark agent performance against
each participant's two-week test-retest consistency on the same measure, meaning that 100% is
interpreted as "the agents replicate participants' responses as well as participants replicate their
own responses two weeks later." Across evaluations spanning attitudes, personality, and
incentivized choices, agents grounded in participants' self-reports ­ particularly those grounded
in both interview and survey responses ­ predicted held-out individual responses substantially
better than prompting with demographic data alone, often approaching participants' own
test-retest consistency, though performance varies meaningfully by outcome reliability and task
structure.

We show that LLM agents grounded in individuals' own self-reports can predict held-out
person-level responses across multiple social-science domains without training outcome-specific
models for each task. We also introduce an evaluation framework that benchmarks agent
performance against participants' two-week test-retest consistency, enabling comparisons across
instruments with different reliability. Finally, by comparing interview-only, survey-only, and

                                                                      2
combined grounding, we provide evidence about which forms of self-report information most
improve individual-level simulation. Our results support a range of near-term research
applications, including heterogeneity analysis, measurement refinement, mixed subjects designs
(14), and experimental design pilot testing.

Using Individuals' Self-Reports to Create Generative Agents

To gather in-depth information on individuals, we draw on two long-standing methodological
traditions in the social and behavioral sciences. First, structured survey questionnaires provide
standardized measures designed to capture the topics social scientists care about, using carefully
formulated wording and response categories that support reliable comparison across respondents
and, in turn, population-level inference. Surveys are typically constructed to cover a broad set of
conceptually distinct constructs efficiently, with items that are intended to tap non-overlapping
dimensions of attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. Second, we draw on in-depth, semi-structured
interviews, which excel at capturing the idiosyncratic factors and lived constraints that shape
how people think and act. Semi-structured interviews pair pre-specified prompts with adaptive
follow-up questions that respond to participants' own answers, allowing respondents to
foreground what they view as most consequential for understanding them (15). Open-ended
narratives can encode multiple features in a single response, linking facts, constraints, and
trajectories that would otherwise require numerous closed-form items. For example, the
statement "Since my back injury, I can only work part-time" simultaneously conveys health
constraints, employment capacity, and anticipated prospects ­ information that is difficult to
recover from standard demographic instruments with predefined response categories. By
combining pre-specified prompts with responsive probing, interviews expand what can be
measured in the first place, not merely how answers are expressed (16, 17). To scale this
semi-structured component, we developed an AI interviewer that conducts interviews using a
fixed protocol paired with adaptive follow-up questions (SM 2).

We recruited a stratified sample (N = 1,052) that approximated U.S. adult distributions on age,
gender, race, region, education, and party identification. Each participant completed a
voice-to-voice interview in English with the AI interviewer, averaging two hours and producing
transcripts with an average length of 6,491 words per participant (std = 2,541; SM 1). To avoid
inadvertently tailoring the interview protocol to our evaluation metrics, we sought an existing
interview protocol that aimed for broad topical coverage. We adopted the interview protocol
developed for the American Voices Project (18). The semi-structured interview protocol included
both fixed questions on a wide range of topics from participants' life stories (e.g., "Tell me the
story of your life--from your childhood, to education, to family and relationships, and to any
major life events you may have had") to their views on current societal issues (e.g., "Some
people tell us about experiences of arrest--of loved ones, family members, friends, or
themselves. How about for you?"; SM 8)--and also follow-up questions generated by the AI
interviewer in real-time. Its broad scope, and its design independent of any of our evaluation
tasks, strengthens results if high performance is achieved.

                                                                      3
Figure 1. The process of collecting participant data and creating generative agents begins by recruiting a stratified sample of 1,052
individuals from the U.S., selected based on age, gender, race, region, education, and party identification. Once recruited, participants
complete a two-hour audio interview with our AI interviewer, followed by surveys and experiments. We create three types of generative
agents for each participant: interview agents using only transcript data, survey agents using only structured survey responses, and
survey-plus-interview agents using both sources. To evaluate these agents, both the generative agents and participants complete the same
surveys and experiments, with participants retaking them two weeks later. We assess individual-level predictive accuracy by comparing
agent responses to participants' Wave 2 responses, normalizing by how consistently each participant replicates their own responses. We
also assess population-level replication by comparing treatment effects and effect sizes across five behavioral experiments. During
evaluation, items are held out from survey-based agents' inputs to prevent direct answer retrieval. Following evaluation, we exclude 27
GSS items synonymous with interview questions from the final evaluation set.

After the interview, respondents completed the core module of the General Social Survey (GSS;
19), a widely used survey across the social sciences, and the 44-item Big Five Inventory
(BFI-44; 20), the most commonly used personality battery from psychology. Additionally, we
elicited participants' choices in five well-known behavioral economic games with real stakes,
the dictator game, trust game, public goods game, and prisoner's dilemma (21-24). Finally, we
evaluated individual choices in social science experimental settings by collecting participants'
choices in a series of five experiments with control and treatment conditions (25-29) drawn from
a recent large-scale replication effort (30). This included every text-based experiment for which
1,000 participants would provide adequate statistical power from within this group of replicated
experiments, which allows for exploration of potential use of generative agents to simulate
experimental replications (SM 4).

To create the generative agents (10, 31), we developed an agent architecture that leverages
different types of information about respondents: (i) "Interview agents" rely on the
semi-structured interviews (SM 3), (ii) "Survey agents" on the structured surveys (the General
Social Survey and Big Five personality inventory), and (iii) "Survey-plus-interview" agents
combine both sources. When an agent is queried, the relevant input information--either the full
interview transcript, the structured survey responses, or both--is injected into the model prompt,
instructing the model to imitate the individual based on their self-reported data (see SM Section

                                                                      4
3 for prompt details). The resulting agents can respond to any textual stimulus, including
forced-choice prompts, surveys, and interactional settings.

We evaluated the generative agents' ability to predict their source participants' responses on the
four surveys and experiments commonly used across social science disciplines. We used the
GSS, Big Five, and economic games to measure the accuracy of the generative agents in
predicting individual attitudes, traits, and behaviors, while the replication studies assessed their
ability to predict population-level treatment effects and effect sizes in a replication. To measure
varying levels in respondents' self-consistency, we asked each participant to complete the four
batteries of items twice, two weeks apart. For all evaluations, we rely on the second wave of data
collection. To prevent direct answer retrieval for the agents relying on survey data in their input,
we exclude from the survey agents' input the questions that we evaluate on for the GSS, and for
the Big 5 all question-answer pairs from the same category as the question being predicted
(categories were defined by the creators of each instrument). In addition, we implemented a
procedure to flag and remove GSS questions from the evaluation set that overlapped
substantively with either other GSS questions or interview questions in the American Voices
Project (details in Materials and Methods). The result of this process was an input for each agent
that was confirmed distinct from the evaluation task. Our metrics and core analyses using the
interview-based, demographic, and persona agents were pre-registered (SM 5).1

A key methodological benefit of simulating specific individuals is the ability to evaluate our
architecture by comparing how accurately each agent replicates the attitudes and behaviors of its
source individual. For the GSS, where responses are categorical, we measure accuracy and
correlation based on whether the agent selects the same survey response as the individual. For
the BFI-44 and economic games, which involve continuous responses, we assess accuracy and
correlation using mean absolute error (MAE). Since individuals often exhibit inconsistency or
drift in their responses over time in both survey and behavioral studies (9, 15, 32), we use
participants' own attitudinal and behavioral consistency as a normalization factor: the probability
of accurately simulating an individual's attitudes or behaviors depends on how consistent those
attitudes and behaviors are over time.

Our main dependent variable is normalized accuracy, calculated as the agent's accuracy in
predicting the individual's responses divided by the individual's own replication accuracy. A
normalized accuracy of 1.0 indicates that the generative agent predicts the individual's responses
as accurately as the individual replicates their own responses two weeks later. For continuous
outcomes, we calculate normalized correlations instead.

To assess the contribution of interviews, surveys, or both sources combined, we compared the
performance of these generative agents with two baselines that replace this information with
alternative forms of description, reflecting how language models have been used to proxy human
behaviors in prior studies: one using demographic attributes (1, 2), and the other using a
paragraph summarizing the target person's profile (31). For the `demographic-based' generative
agents, we used participants' responses to GSS questions to capture individuals' age, gender,
race, and political ideology ­ demographic attributes commonly used in previous studies (2). For
the "persona-based" generative agents, we asked participants to write a brief paragraph about
themselves after the interview, including their personal background, personality, and
demographic details, similar to material used in prior work (31).

1 Pre-registration materials: https://osf.io/mexkf/?view_only=375fe67b9a3e48afa7c3684c9d344da4

                                                                      5
Predicting Individuals' Attitudes and Behaviors
Self-report-grounded agents outperformed demographic and persona baselines across evaluation
families. Our main results are shown in Figure 2. Our evaluation focused on 150 core GSS
questions, which we used to establish a benchmark for measuring the agents' predictive accuracy.
Each question had an average of 3.31 response options (std = 1.58), yielding a random chance
prediction accuracy of .30.

Figure 2. Generative agents' predictive performance and 95% confidence intervals. The consistency rate between participants and the
predictive performance of generative agents is evaluated across various constructs and averaged across individuals. For the General
Social Survey (GSS), accuracy is reported due to its categorical response types, while the Big Five personality traits and economic games
report correlations because of the numerical response type. Normalized measures are provided for all metrics.

For the GSS, the interview-based generative agents predicted participants' responses with an
average normalized accuracy of 0.83 (std = 0.11), calculated from a raw accuracy of 65.67% (std
= 6.51) divided by participants' self-consistency of 79.53% (std = 8.65). The survey agents had
an average normalized accuracy of 0.82 (std = 0.11), while the survey-plus-interview agents
scored 0.86 (std = 0.09). These three agent types significantly outperformed both
demographic-based and persona-based agents (Figure 2). The demographic-based generative
agents achieved a normalized accuracy of 0.74 (std = 0.12), while persona-based agents reached
0.71 (std = 0.12). An ANOVA of the accuracy rates rejected the null hypothesis of no significant
difference between interview, survey, and survey-plus-interview agents, and the two baseline
agents.
The second component of our evaluation focused on predicting participants' Big Five personality
traits using the BFI-44, which assesses five personality dimensions: openness, conscientiousness,

                                                                      6
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism (33). Each dimension is calculated from eight to ten
Likert scale questions. Our generative agents predicted participants' responses to the individual
items, which were then used to compute the predicted aggregate scores for each personality
dimension. Because these are continuous measures, we calculated correlation coefficients and
normalized correlations, which again divide the agents' correlation by the participants'
correlation with their own responses two weeks later. For the Big Five, the interview-based
generative agents achieved a normalized correlation of 0.80 (std = 1.88), based on a raw
correlation of r = 0.78 (std = 0.70) divided by the `replication correlation' (the correlation
between participants' wave 1 and wave 2 answers) of 0.95 (std = 0.76). As with the GSS, the
interview-based generative agents outperformed both demographic-based (normalized
correlation = 0.61) and persona-based (normalized correlation = 0.75) agents. Survey agents
performed comparatively worse than for the GSS (normalized correlation = 0.65), and
survey-plus-interview agents were similar to interview only (normalized correlation = 0.77).
Across five agent architectures, Big Five MAE differed significantly (F(4, 5255) = 51.83, p <
0.001). Interview-based agents (MAE=0.665) produced lower MAE than demographic-based
(MAE=0.755) and persona-based agents (MAE=0.737), but higher MAE than survey agents
(MAE=0.622) and survey-plus-interview agents (MAE=0.621).

The third component involved participants' decisions in five well-known economic games,
designed to elicit participants' behaviors in decision-making contexts with real stakes. These
included the Dictator Game, the first and second player Trust Games, a Public Goods Game, and
the Prisoner's Dilemma (21-24). To ensure genuine engagement, participants were offered
monetary incentives. Participants' responses for each game were standardized to scale from 0 to
1. We then compared the generative agents' predicted values to the actual values obtained from
participants. Since the outcomes in these economic games are continuous measures, we
calculated correlation coefficients and normalized correlations. On average, the interview-based
generative agents achieved a normalized correlation of 0.66 (std = 2.83). Survey agents achieved
a normalized correlation of 0.38 (std = 3.01) and survey-plus-interview agents 0.49 (std = 2.79).
There was no significant difference in MAE between the agents for the economic games (F(2,
3153) = 0.12, p = 0.89).

In exploratory analyses, we conducted additional tests by ablating portions of the
interview-based generative agents' interviews to examine the impact of interview content volume
and style (see SI Table 6). First, we randomly removed 80% of the interview transcript
(equivalent to removing 96 minutes of the 120-minute interview) and found that the
interview-based agents still achieved an average normalized accuracy of 0.79 (std = 0.11) on the
GSS and normalized correlation of 0.73 (std = 0.74) on Big Five. Second, to investigate how
much the predictive power of interviews came from linguistic cues embedded in the language
used by interviewees or the informational content of the interviews, we created
"interview-summary" generative agents by prompting the large language model to convert
interview transcripts into bullet-pointed summaries of key response pairs, capturing the factual
content while removing the original linguistic features. These agents achieved a normalized
accuracy of 0.84 (std = 0.15) on the GSS and a normalized correlation of 0.70 (std = 0.67) on Big
Five.

                                                                      7
Predicting Experimental Replications

Participants took part in five social science experiments to assess whether generative agents can
predict treatment effects in experimental settings commonly used by social scientists. These were
drawn from a collection of published studies included in a large-scale replication effort (25-30;
SM 4), including investigations of how perceived intent affects blame assignment (25) and how
fairness influences emotional responses (26). Both human participants in our work and
generative agents completed all five studies, with p-values and treatment effect sizes calculated
using the statistical methods from the original studies. While our five-study design is
underpowered for comparing the predicted and replicated effect sizes, the effect sizes estimated
from the different types of generative agents were larger than and highly correlated with those of
the participants (ranging from r = 0.91 to r = 0.99), as shown in Table 1. The overall pattern is
similar to that observed previously (1).

               Human         Agent                Survey                  Survey + interview Demographic            Persona
               replication   prediction

               Participants  Interview

Replication    p Effect size p Effect size p Effect size p Effect size p Effect size p Effect size
  Studies

Ames & Fiske ***     8.03    ***  12.59           ***     21.22           ***  17.35           ***  13.43           ***      10.30

2015

Cooney et al. ***    0.40    ***  1.34            ***     1.61            ***  1.43            ***  1.37            ***      1.27

2016

Halevy & Halali ***  0.93    ***  2.98            ***     3.95            ***  3.06            ***  4.22            ***      3.35

2015

Rai et al.           0.06         0.094           *       0.16                 0.09            ***  0.21                     0.078
  2017

Schilke et al. ***   0.36    ***  2.97            ***     9.64            ***  3.18            ***  5.52            ***      3.74

2015

  Effect size                     Correlation             Correlation          Correlation          Correlation          Correlation
  correlation
                                     r = 0.98                r = 0.91             r = 0.99             r = 0.93             r = 0.94
w/ human rep.                         95% CI                  95% CI               95% CI               95% CI               95% CI
                                    [0.75, 1.00]            [0.15, 0.99]         [0.87, 1,00]         [0.26, 1,00]         [0.38, 1,00]

Table 1. Results of replication studies by human participants and generative agents. We report the p-values (***: < 0.001, **: <
0.01, *: < 0.05) and Cohen's d for effect sizes.

Richer Background Data Reduces Bias in Generative Agent Accuracy

AI systems less accurately predict the attitudes and behaviors of members of underrepresented
populations (34). To address this concern, we conducted a subgroup analysis focusing on
political ideology, race, and gender--dimensions of particular interest in past research (1, 2, 11,
20, 35). We aimed to assess whether the detailed self-report data in interviews and surveys could
mitigate biases compared to methods using demographic prompts, which exhibited stereotyping
in prior research (11, 20, 34, 35). We quantified bias using the Demographic Parity Difference
(DPD), which measures the difference in performance between the best-performing and
worst-performing groups (36, 37). For the GSS, we report DPD in percentages; for Big Five and
economic games, in correlation coefficients. Subgroups were defined by participants' responses
to GSS items (details in SM 5). Figure 3 reports these results.

                                                                      8
Across all tasks, agents that rely on the survey and/or interview information consistently reduced
group-level bias (DPD) compared to demographic-based and persona agents. For political
ideology in the GSS, DPD fell from 13.75% with demographic-based agents to 8.60% with
interview-based agents, and was lowest for survey agents (6.22%) and survey-plus-interview
agents (7.09%). In the Big Five personality task, DPD dropped from 0.166 (demographic) to
0.063 (interview), 0.176 (survey), and reached its lowest with survey-plus-interview agents at
0.048. Similarly, in economic games, DPD decreased from 0.498 (demographic) to 0.194
(interview), with survey and survey-plus-interview agents performing slightly better (0.216 and
0.214, respectively). Racial subgroup DPD also showed reductions: in the GSS, DPD declined
from 3.39% (demographic) to 2.22% (interview) and further to 1.95% with survey agents, while
survey-plus-interview agents achieved 2.49%. For the Big Five, DPD improved from 0.173
(demographic) to 0.111 (interview), 0.088 (survey), and 0.081 (survey-plus-interview); in
economic games, from 0.043 (demographic) to 0.040 (interview), 0.100 (survey), and 0.046
(survey-plus-interview). Gender-based DPD remained uniformly low across all agent types and
tasks, with values typically under 1%, likely due to its already low level of discrepancy.

Figure 3. Demographic Parity Difference (DPD) for generative agents across political ideology, race, and gender subgroups on three
tasks: GSS (in percentages), Big Five, and economic games (in correlation coefficients). DPD represents the performance disparity
between the most and least favored groups within each demographic category. Generative agents using interviews consistently show
lower DPDs compared to those using demographic information or persona descriptions, suggesting that interview-based generative
agents mitigate bias more effectively across all tasks. Gender-based DPDs remain relatively low and consistent across all agent types.

What drives the accuracy of interview-based agents?
Prior work provides frameworks to understand the limits of survey data's predictive accuracy
(15) and has found similar performance of LLM-based predictions on hold-out samples of survey

                                                                      9
questions (3). A key open question remains: why does the interview data contribute additional
accuracy gains? Here, we evaluate two potential mechanisms in the context of accurate
prediction of GSS responses. First, direct retrieval: even when interview and GSS question
wordings differ, an LLM may be able to locate information from the semi-structured interview
transcript that directly indicates the person's response to a given GSS question (e.g., "I don't
work because I am disabled" directly implies an answer to the GSS question, "Are you
employed?"). Second, reasoning/inference: even where the interview transcript does not directly
indicate a person's response, the transcript may nonetheless provide cues that allow the model to
infer the response (e.g., "I am currently in school" suggests the most likely answer to the GSS
question "Do you have a supervisor?" is "no," though some U.S. adults are both students and
hold jobs where they report to supervisors).

To evaluate these mechanisms, we run a two-step procedure (more details can be found in
section 10 of the Supplementary Information). For a random subset of agents, we create all
interview-answer × GSS-question pairs (an average of 21,713 per agent) and use GPT-4o-mini
to classify whether an interview answer provides enough information to answer a GSS item by
direct retrieval or by inference, or can't be used for either. We then rank GSS questions by the
share of agents for which each question is "directly retrievable" or "answerable by inference,"
and recompute normalized accuracy as we progressively drop questions most likely to fall in
these categories. We compare interview agents with both demographic and persona agents; the
latter lack access to interview transcripts and thus should be relatively insensitive to dropping
these questions.

Removing the 100 questions most likely answerable via direct retrieval reduces interview-agent
accuracy from 0.83 to 0.80, while demographic and persona agents rise from 0.71 to 0.73 and
0.75, respectively; this increase may be driven by the fact that the remaining GSS questions are
more likely to be predictable from demographic characteristics (e.g., gender). Removing the 100
GSS questions most likely answerable by inference reduces interview-agent accuracy from 0.83
to 0.77, while demographic and persona agents remain essentially flat (from 0.71 to 0.70). Taken
together, these results suggest both mechanisms play a role in the predictive accuracy of
generative agents built from in-depth interview transcripts, i.e., it is both the case that these
interviews include information that can be directly retrieved to simulate a person's responses to
the GSS questions, and also that they provide information that can be leveraged by the
underlying LLM to infer a person's likely responses.

Research Access for the Agent Bank

Access to an agent bank can help lay the foundations for replicable science using AI-based tools.
To balance scientific potential with privacy concerns, the authors provide open access to
aggregated responses on the fixed tasks used to create the survey-based agents (e.g., GSS).
Moreover, the codebase for generating interview-based agents is available as an open-source
repository. Researchers interested in constructing agents with their own data can access it here.2

2 https://github.com/joonspk-research/generative_agent

                                                                     10
Materials and Methods Summary
We contracted with the recruitment firm Bovitz (38) to obtain a U.S. sample of 1,000 individuals,
stratified by age, census division, education, ethnicity, gender, income, neighborhood, political
ideology, and sexual orientation. Participants completed interviews with the AI interviewer,
along with Qualtrics versions of the General Social Survey (GSS), Big Five personality
inventory, economic games, and selected experimental studies. For the GSS, we focused on
questions from the "core" module, excluding questions with more than 25 response options and
conditional questions. For the experimental studies, we selected five studies from a recent
large-scale replication effort (25-30). These were chosen based on two inclusion criteria: first,
the study had to be describable to a language model using text or images, and second, the power
analysis from the replication effort indicated that the effects would be observable with 1,000 or
fewer participants. This ensured that our human participants could replicate the effects if present.
The selected studies (25-29) examined harm based on perceived intent, the role of fairness in
emotional reactions, the perceived benefits of conflict intervention, dehumanization in
willingness to harm others, and how power influences trust. To rule out that agents with access to
the interview data performed well on the GSS because interview questions are similar to GSS
question we designed a robustness check that systematically screened all 54,694 possible
pairings of GSS items and interview questions ­ first with a GPT-based classifier, then by human
review--for near-duplicate wording (SI section 9). The process flagged 27 GSS items, which we
removed to ensure interview-based agents could not boost their accuracy by parroting answers to
questions that were effectively asked twice. We applied the same procedure to identify questions
in the GSS that are synonymous to other GSS questions and found none.

Acknowledgements
We thank Huanxing Chen, Garbo Chung, David Grusky, Luke Hewitt, and Chrystal Redekopp
for their contributions to the project. This work was supported by Google, Toyota Research
Institute, Ford, Stanford's Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, American
Express, AXA, Banco Itaú, Hanwha, and SCBX.

Contribution Statement
J.S.P., M.S.B., and P.L. conceptualized the project and developed the technology. J.S.P., M.S.B.,
R.W., A.S. and B.M.H. developed the participant elicitation and evaluation methodologies. J.S.P.
and C.Q.Z. engineered the technology, including the AI interviewer and simulation system.
J.S.P., J.K., C.Q.Z., and N.E. collected the data and conducted the formal analyses. J.S.P. led the
investigation. J.S.P., R.W., M.S.B. and J.K. wrote the article. A.S., B.M.H., P.L., M.R.M. and
C.C. reviewed and edited the manuscript. M.S.B., P.L., R.W., A.S., B.M.H., and M.R.M.
supervised the research.

Replication materials
Replication files can be found on the OSF repository: https://osf.io/t6g7k/files/osfstorage

                                                                     11
References

    1. A. Ashokkumar, L. Hewitt, I. Ghezae, R. Willer, "Predicting Results of Social Science
         Experiments Using Large Language Models" (2024).

    2. L. P. Argyle, E. C. Busby, N. Fulda, J. R. Gubler, C. Rytting, D. Wingate, Out of one,
         many: Using language models to simulate human samples. Political Analysis 31, 337-351
         (2023).

    3. O. Toubia, G. Z. Gui, T. Peng, D. J. Merlau, A. Li, H. Chen, Twin-2K-500: A data set for
         building digital twins of over 2,000 people based on their answers to over 500 questions.
         Marketing Science 44, 1446-1455 (2025).

    4. M. D. Verhagen, B. Stroebl, T. Liu, L. T. Liu, M. J. Salganik, The Book of Life approach:
         Enabling richness and scale for life course research. arXiv:2507.03027 (2025).

    5. P. Li, N. Castelo, Z. Katona, M. Sarvary, Determining the validity of large language
         models for automated perceptual analysis. Marketing Science 43, 254-266 (2024).

    6. M. Binz, & E. Schulz, Using cognitive psychology to understand GPT-3, Proc. Natl.
         Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120 (6) e2218523120, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218523120 (2023).

    7. Z. Cui, N. Li, H. Zhou, A large-scale replication of scenario-based experiments in
         psychology and management using large language models. Nat. Comput. Sci. 5, 627-634
         (2025).

    8. J. R. Anthis, R. Liu, S. M. Richardson, A. C. Kozlowski, B. Koch, J. Evans, E.
         Brynjolfsson, M. Bernstein, LLM social simulations are a promising research method.
         arXiv:2504.02234 (2025).

    9. M. J. Salganik et al., Measuring the predictability of life outcomes with a scientific mass
         collaboration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 8398-8403 (2020).

    10. J. S. Park, J. C. O'Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, M. S. Bernstein, Generative
         agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior, in Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM
         Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (ACM, 2023).

    11. A. Wang, J. Morgenstern, J. P. Dickerson, "Large language models cannot replace human
         participants because they cannot portray identity groups" (2024).

    12. Y. Qu, J. Wang, Performance and biases of large language models in public opinion
         simulation. Humanit. Soc. Sci. Commun. 11, 1095 (2024).

    13. J. Boelaert, S. Coavoux, É. Ollion, I. Petev, P. Präg, Machine bias: How do generative
         language models answer opinion polls? Sociological Methods & Research 54, 1156-1196
         (2025).

    14. D. Broska, M. Howes, A. van Loon, The Mixed Subjects Design: Treating large language
         models as potentially informative observations. Sociological Methods & Research 54,
         1074-1109 (2025).

    15. I. Lundberg et al., The origins of unpredictability in life outcome prediction tasks. Proc.
         Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 121, e2322973121 (2024).

    16. A. Lareau, Listening to People: A Practical Guide to Interviewing, Participant
         Observation, Data Analysis, and Writing It All Up (Univ. of Chicago Press, 2021).

    17. R. S. Weiss, Learning From Strangers: The Art and Method of Qualitative Interview
         Studies (Free Press, 1994).

    18. Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality, "American Voices Project" (2021);
         https://inequality.stanford.edu/avp/methodology.

    19. National Opinion Research Center, "General Social Survey, 2023" (NORC at the
         University of Chicago, 2023); https://gss.norc.org.

                                                                     12
20. M. Cheng, T. Piccardi, D. Yang, CoMPosT: Characterizing and Evaluating Caricature in
    LLM Simulations, in Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in
    Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2023) (Association for Computational
    Linguistics, 2023).

21. R. Forsythe, J. L. Horowitz, N. E. Savin, M. Sefton, Fairness in simple bargaining
    experiments. Games and Economic Behavior 6, 347-369 (1994).

22. J. Berg, J. Dickhaut, K. McCabe, Trust, reciprocity, and social history. Games and
    Economic Behavior 10, 122-142 (1995).

23. J. O. Ledyard, in The Handbook of Experimental Economics, J. H. Kagel, A. E. Roth,
    Eds. (Princeton University Press, 1995), pp. 111-194.

24. A. Rapoport, A. M. Chammah, Prisoner's Dilemma: A Study in Conflict and Cooperation
    (University of Michigan Press, 1965).

25. D. L. Ames, S. T. Fiske, Perceived intent motivates people to magnify observed harms.
    PNAS 112, 3599-3605 (2015).

26. G. Cooney, D. T. Gilbert, T. D. Wilson, When fairness matters less than we expect. PNAS
    113, 11168-11171 (2016).

27. N. Halevy, E. Halali, Selfish third parties act as peacemakers by transforming conflicts
    and promoting cooperation. PNAS 112, 6937-6942 (2015).

28. T. S. Rai, P. Valdesolo, J. Graham, Dehumanization increases instrumental violence, but
    not moral violence. PNAS 114, 8511-8516 (2017).

29. O. Schilke, M. Reimann, K. S. Cook, Power decreases trust in social exchange. PNAS
    112, 12950-12955 (2015).

30. C. F. Camerer et al., "Mechanical Turk Replication Project" (2024);
    https://mtrp.info/index.html.

31. J. S. Park, L. Popowski, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, M. S. Bernstein, Social
    simulacra: Creating Populated Prototypes for Social Computing Systems, in Proceedings
    of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (ACM,
    2022).

32. S. Ansolabehere, J. Rodden, J. M. Snyder Jr., The Strength of Issues: Using Multiple
    Measures to Gauge Preference Stability, Ideological Constraint, and Issue Voting.
    American Political Science Review 102, 215-232 (2008).

33. O. P. John, S. Srivastava, The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and
    theoretical perspectives, in Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, L. A. Pervin,
    O. P. John, Eds. (Guilford Press, ed. 2, 1999), pp. 102-138.

34. L. Messeri, M. J. Crockett, Artificial intelligence and illusions of understanding in
    scientific research. Nature 627, 49-58 (2024).

35. S. Santurkar, E. Durmus, F. Ladhak, C. Lee, P. Liang, T. Hashimoto, in Proceedings of
    the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML '23) (PMLR, 2023).

36. M. Hardt, E. Price, N. Srebro, Equality of opportunity in supervised learning, in
    Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29 (2016), pp. 3315-3323;
    arXiv:1610.02413.

37. S. Barocas, M. Hardt, A. Narayanan, Fairness and Machine Learning (2019);
    https://fairmlbook.org

38. M. N. Stagnaro, J. Druckman, A. J. Berinsky, A. A. Arechar, R. Willer, D. Rand,
    Representativeness versus Response Quality: Assessing Nine Opt-In Online Survey
    Samples. OSF Preprints [Preprint] (2024); https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/h9j2dc

39. E. Bruch, J. Atwell, Agent-Based Models in Empirical Social Research. Sociological
    Methods & Research 44, 186-221 (2015).

                                                               13
40. T. C. Schelling, Dynamic models of segregation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1,
    143-186 (1971).

41. J. M. Epstein, R. L. Axtell, Growing Artificial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom
    Up (The MIT Press, 1996).

42. R. Axtell, "Why agents? On the varied motivations for agent computing in the social
    sciences" (Center on Social and Economic Dynamics Working Paper No. 17, 2000).

43. K. M. Carley, Organizational learning and personnel turnover. Organization Science 3,
    20-46 (1992).

44. I. S. Lustick, PS-I: A user-friendly agent-based modeling platform for testing theories of
    political identity and political stability. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
    Simulation 5, 3 (2002).

45. T. C. Schelling, Micromotives and Macrobehavior (W. W. Norton & Company, 1978).
46. E. Bonabeau, Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human

    systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99 (suppl. 3), 7280-7287 (2002);
    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.082080899
47. M. W. Macy, R. Willer, From Factors to Actors: Computational Sociology and
    Agent-Based Modeling. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 28, 143-166 (2002);
    https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.28.110601.141117
48. J. von Neumann, O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (Princeton
    University Press, 1944).
49. McFadden, D. (1974). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In P.
    Zarembka (Ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics (pp. 105-142). Academic Press.
50. J. J. Horton, "Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn
    from homo silicus?" (2023).
51. T. W. Smith, M. Davern, J. Freese, S.L. Morgan, "General Social Surveys, 1972-2020:
    Cumulative Codebook" (NORC at the University of Chicago, 2021);
    https://gss.norc.org/content/dam/gss/get-documentation/pdf/other/2020%20GSS%20Repl
    icating%20Core.pdf
52. R. M. Groves, F. J. Fowler Jr., M. P. Couper, J. M. Lepkowski, E. Singer, R. Tourangeau,
    Survey Methodology (John Wiley & Sons, ed. 2, 2009).
53. S. Brinkmann, S. Kvale, InterViews: Learning the Craft of Qualitative Research
    Interviewing (SAGE Publications, ed. 3, 2014).
54. N. F. Liu, K. Lin, J. Hewitt, A. Paranjape, M. Bevilacqua, F. Petroni, P. Liang, Lost in the
    middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for
    Computational Linguistics 11, 1312-1327 (2024).
55. B. Reeves, C. Nass, The Media Equation: How People Treat Computers, Television, and
    New Media Like Real People and Places (Cambridge University Press, 1996).
56. OpenAI, "Text to speech guide" (2024);
    https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/text-to-speech (accessed 20 September 2024).
57. OpenAI, "Whisper" (2024); https://openai.com/research/whisper (accessed 20 September
    2024).
58. OpenAI, "GPT-4" (2024); https://openai.com/research/gpt-4 (accessed 20 September
    2024).
59. P. V. Marsden, T. W. Smith, M. Hout, Tracking US Social Change Over a Half-Century:
    The General Social Survey at Fifty. Annual Review of Sociology 46, 109-134 (2020).
60. NORC at the University of Chicago, "General Social Surveys, 1972-2022: Cumulative
    Codebook" (2023);

                                                               14
    https://gss.norc.org/content/dam/gss/get-documentation/pdf/codebook/GSS%202022%20
    Codebook.pdf (accessed 20 September 2024).
61. S. C. Schmitt, J. J. Gaughan, B. N. Doritya, A. L. Gonzalez, L. D. Smillie, R. E. Lucas,
    D. B. Nelson, M. Brent Donnellan, The Big Five Across Time, Space, and Method: A
    Systematic Review. PsyArXiv [Preprint] (2023); https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/37w8p
62. Y. Strus, J. Cieciuch, Toward a synthesis of personality, temperament, motivation,
    emotion and mental health models within the Circumplex of Personality Metatraits.
    Journal of Research in Personality 82, 103844 (2019).
63. C. F. Camerer, Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction (Princeton
    University Press, 2003).
64. B. A. Nosek, G. Alter, G. C. Banks, D. Borsboom, S. D. Bowman, S. J. Breckler, S.
    Buck, C. D. Chambers, G. Chin, G. Christensen, M. Contestabile, A. Dafoe, E. Eich, J.
    Freese, R. Glennerster, D. Goroff, D. P. Green, B. Hesse, M. Humphreys, J. Ishiyama, D.
    Karlan, A. Kraut, A. Lupia, P. Mabry, T. Madon, N. Malhotra, E. Mayo-Wilson, M.
    McNutt, E. Miguel, E. Levy Paluck, U. Simonsohn, C. Soderberg, B. A. Spellman, J.
    Turitto, G. VandenBos, S. Vazire, E. J. Wagenmakers, R. Wilson, T. Yarkoni, Promoting
    an open research culture. Science 348, 1422-1425 (2015).
65. J. Chandler, M. Cumpston, T. Li, M. J. Page, V. J. H. W. Welch, Cochrane Handbook for
    Systematic Reviews of Interventions (Wiley, ed. 2, 2019).
66. Silver, N. C., & Dunlap, W. P. (1987). Averaging correlation coefficients: Should Fisher's
    z transformation be used? Journal of Applied Psychology, 72(1), 146-148.

                                                               15
                     Supplementary Materials for

 LLM Agents Grounded in Self-Reports Enable General-Purpose Simulation
                                         of Individuals

 Joon Sung Park, Carolyn Q. Zou, Jonne Kamphorst, Niles Egan, Aaron Shaw, Benjamin Mako
    Hill, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, Robb Willer, Michael S. Bernstein

The PDF file includes:
         Constructing the Agent Bank
         Creating the AI Interviewer Agent
         Generative Agent Architecture
         Surveys and Experimental Constructs
         Evaluation Methods
         Supplementary Results
         Deviations from the Pre-Analysis-Plan for the GSS
         Why do interview-based generative agents work?
         Results using different models
         Supplementary Tables

                                                                                                                    1
1. Constructing the Agent Bank
     We created over 1,000 generative agents, each modeling a real individual in the U.S.,

collectively forming a representative sample of the U.S. population. To achieve this, we recruited
a stratified sample of 1,052 individuals from the U.S. and conducted two hour voice-to-voice
interviews using an AI interviewer (SM 2). In addition, we collected each participant's responses
to a series of surveys and behavioral experiments. The interview transcripts and responses to
surveys formed a knowledge base about participants that we use to condition agent behaviors
(SM 3). We then combine survey responses and experiments to assess the fidelity of the resulting
agents. This section details the participant data collection procedure, including participant
recruitment and flow, demographic distributions, and informed consent.

Figure 1. The study platform and interface. Once recruited, our participants are routed to our custom-built platform.
The interface includes several components: a) Participant sign-up page: Participants sign up with an ID and
password of their choice. b) Avatar creator: Participants consent and create a 2-D sprite avatar to represent them in
the study platform. c) Main interface displaying the study components: The modules include: 1) study consent, 2)
avatar creation, 3) interview, 4) surveys and experiments, 5) self-consistency retake of the surveys and experiments.
The modules only become available in order; the button to start a module becomes clickable once the participants
have completed all previous modules. The self-consistency survey and experiment module only becomes available
two weeks after the participants have completed the previous modules.

                                                                                                                    2
Data Collection Procedure
     Data collection took place on our custom-built platform, where participants signed up with

an ID and a password of their choosing (see Figure 1 for visual records of the study platform).
This process was conducted in two phases. In the first phase, participants were informed about
the study's goals, scholarly benefits, and potential risks, and provided informed consent. Once
our participants provided consent to the study, they created a custom, 2-D sprite avatar using our
avatar creator to visually represent themselves on the study platform. They then completed a
two-hour interview with our AI interviewer, followed by a series of surveys and experiments.
The surveys and experiments were administered in the following order: the General Social
Survey (GSS; 20), the 44-item Big Five Inventory (BFI-44; 21), five behavioral economic games
(22-25), and five behavioral experiments (26-31). Within the economic games and the replication
studies, the order of the subcomponent studies was randomized for counterbalancing purposes,
and similarly for the BFI-44, the order of questions was randomized. The GSS adhered to the
sequence recommended by its documentation (42). Details of all surveys and experiments appear
in SM 4.

     For the second phase, participants joined a follow-up study two weeks after their first phase
participation. In this phase, participants completed the same surveys and experiments as in the
first phase, except for the interview. This was done to account for any inconsistency in responses
to surveys and experiments, allowing us to measure the internal consistency of participants'
responses over a two-week period.

Recruitment and Demographics
     We aimed to enroll a total of 1,000 participants who would complete all study components,

including the second phase participation scheduled two weeks after the initial involvement. The
sample size of 1,000 was determined to ensure that we could replicate the five behavioral
experiments in our study with appropriate statistical power. Anticipating an attrition rate of
approximately 20% for the re-taking session, we recruited 1,300 participants for the first phase of
the study. The participation rate for the self-consistency phase was higher than expected; to
maintain the representativeness of our sample, we retained 1,052 participants in the final pool.

     Participants were recruited through Bovitz, a study recruitment firm (41). Our stratification
strategy aimed to recruit a nationally representative sample based on age, race, gender, region of
residence, educational attainment, and political ideology. The only inclusion criteria were that all
participants must be at least 18 years old and currently living in the U.S. Participants were paid
$60 for agreeing to participate in the first phase, which included the interview and the initial
round of surveys and experiments. They were paid an additional $30 for joining the second phase
of the study. Additionally, for both phases, participants were eligible for a bonus payment ($0 to
$10) depending on their choices in the economic games. The mean age of our participants was
47.55 (std = 15.93), with maximum age being 84 and minimum 18. With respect to gender, 593
participants identified as female, and 459 as male. With respect to education, 283 participants
held a bachelor's degree, 151 had a higher degree, 185 had an associate's degree, and the rest had
a high school diploma or some high school-level education. With respect to ethnicity, 833 of our
participants identified as white/Caucasian, 154 as black/African American, 53 as Asian, and 95

                                                                                                                    3
as other. Note that for ethnicity, the participants could choose more than one option. The full
demographic breakdown is described in Table 1.

Participant Consent
     The data we collect in this study, particularly the qualitative interview data, is difficult to

anonymize and poses a risk due to the potentially sensitive nature of the interview content.
Therefore, in addition to following best practices and employing precautionary strategies for
providing the agent bank access to the scientific community, we placed significant emphasis on
the consent procedure. We worked with our Institutional Review Board (IRB) for over six
months to ensure that participants maintain autonomy and provide informed consent. Participants
were made aware that, despite efforts to de-identify their data by programmatically replacing all
occurrences of their names with pseudonyms, there is still a possibility that the information they
provide--such as demographic details, personal history, and political views--may be
inadvertently shared as researchers use the Agent Bank. They were informed that their data
would be used to develop AI models simulating human behaviors, which "aim to simulate how
[they] might behave in specific situations or respond to certain survey questions," and that these
agents and data might become available to other researchers strictly for academic purposes.

     Additionally, participants were informed that they have the right to withdraw their consent
at any time, even after completing their participation. Requests for data removal will be honored
for the first 25 years following the completion of the study to the best of our ability. Participants
will also be kept informed of significant changes in the model's capabilities that may affect their
privacy, with the assurance that privacy risks will be reassessed as necessary. Despite our best
efforts, participants are aware of the inherent risks involved in the collection of personal
information, acknowledging that "achieving complete anonymity remains challenging." They are
also aware that "the models we construct may become increasingly powerful over time,"
potentially inferring more information than currently feasible.

2. Creating the AI Interviewer Agent
     To ensure high quality and consistency of the interview data, we developed an AI

interviewer agent to conduct semi-structured interviews with study participants. Conducting
large-scale interviews using human interviewers poses significant challenges, including threats to
data quality, consistency, and scalability (43). By employing an AI interviewer-agent built with a
variant of the generative agent architecture (15), we aimed to ensure uniformity in the style and
quality of interviewer interactions across all participants. Additionally, this approach allowed us
to scale up our data collection to over 1,000 participants.

                                                                                                                    4
Figure 2. The architecture of the interviewer agent. It takes as input the participants' utterances and the interview
script, generating the next action in the form of follow-up questions or deciding to move on to the next question
module using a language model. A reflection module helps the architecture succinctly summarize and infer insights
from the ongoing interview, enabling the agent to more effectively generate follow-up questions.

AI Interviewer Agent Architecture
     A trained human interviewer knows when and how to ask meaningful follow-up questions,

balancing the need to adhere to a well-designed interview script while allowing for detours that
help participants open up and share aspects they may have initially forgotten or not thought to
share (33, 34, 44). To instill this capability in an AI interviewer agent, we needed to design an
interviewer architecture that affords the researchers control over the overarching content and
structure of the interview while allowing the interviewer agent a degree of freedom to explore
follow-up questions that are hard-coded in the interview script. This served as our design goal for
the AI interviewer agent.

     Our interviewer architecture takes an interview protocol and the most recent utterances from
the interviewee as inputs and outputs an action to either: 1) move on to the next question in the
script, or 2) ask a follow-up question based on the conversation so far. The interview script is an
ordered list of questions, with each question associated with a field indicating the amount of time
to be spent on that particular question. At the start of a new question block in the interview
script, the AI interviewer begins by asking the scripted question verbatim. As participants
respond, the AI interviewer uses a language model to make dynamic decisions about the best
next step within the time limit set for the question block. For instance, when asking a participant
about their childhood, if the response includes a remark like, "I was born in New Hampshire... I
really enjoyed nature there," but without specifics about what they loved about the place in their
childhood, the interviewer would generate and ask a follow-up question such as, "Are there any
particular trails or outdoor places you liked in New Hampshire, or had memorable experiences in
as a child?" Conversely, when asking the participant to state their profession, if the participant
responds, "I am a dentist," the interviewer would determine that the question was completely
answered and move on to the next question.

     The reasoning and generation of the follow-up questions were done by prompting a
language model. However, to generate effective actions for the interviewer, the language model

                                                                                                                    5
needed to remember and reason over the prior conversational turns to ask meaningful follow-up
questions that are informed and relevant in the context of what the participants have already
shared. While modern language models have become increasingly proficient at reasoning, they
still struggle to consider every piece of information in the prompt if it is too long (45). Thus,
indiscriminately including everything from the interview up to that point risks gradually
degrading the performance of the interviewer in generating effective follow-up questions or
decisions to move on.

     To overcome this, our interviewer architecture includes a reflection module that dynamically
synthesizes the conversation so far and outputs a summary note describing inferences the
interviewer can make about the participants. For instance, for the participant mentioned earlier, it
would generate reflections such as:

     {
         "place of birth": "New Hampshire"
         "outdoorsy vs. indoorsy": "outdoorsy with potentially a lot of
         time spent outdoors"

      }
Then, when prompting the language model to generate the interviewer's actions, instead of
including the full interview transcript, we included the much more concise but descriptive
reflection notes the interviewer had accumulated up to that point and the most recent 5,000
characters from the interview transcript (Figure 2).

Interview Script
     With the design of the interview script fed to our interviewer agent, we aimed to satisfy two

goals. The first goal, shared with qualitative research, is that a well-designed script with
questions that inspire meaningful answers is crucial for the study's objective of creating
generative agents that encapsulate a nuanced portrait of the individuals we are modeling. The
second goal is more unique to our study: we wanted an interview script that was designed
independently of our evaluation metrics, by researchers outside our team. This approach ensures
that we do not unfairly tailor the content of the interview script to favor or align with predicting
participants' responses to the specific surveys and experiments included in our study.

     To conduct the interviews, we employed a slightly abbreviated version of the interview
script developed and used by the American Voices Project (35), which we include in Table 7.
The American Voices Project initiative involves recruiting a representative sample of the U.S.
population for in-depth, approximately three-hour interviews. During these interviews,
participants are questioned about their life experiences, including their life stories and
perspectives on various social, political, and value-related topics. For instance, the interview
script starts with an open-ended and broad question such as, "To start, I would like to begin with
a big question: tell me the story of your life. Start from the beginning--from your childhood, to
education, to family and relationships, and to any major life events you may have had." It then
proceeds to more topical questions, such as "How have you been thinking about race in the U.S.
recently?" We selected this interview script due to its broad coverage that explores the lived
experiences of the interviewees. However, the script is extensive and includes specific questions
that delve into intricate details that we considered too specific for many potential use cases of our

                                                                                                                    6
agents, such as individuals' financial spending in various categories. Therefore, to make the
interview manageable in a two-hour session, we omitted parts of the script (e.g., rapid-fire
questions that delve into specific details of the participants' spending habits, or COVID-era life
pattern changes) during our interviews with the participants.

Figure 3. The interview interface. a) The main interview interface: A 2-D sprite representing the AI interviewer
agent is displayed in a white circle that pulsates to match the level of the audio, visualizing the interviewer agent's
speech during the AI interviewer's turn. b) Participant's response: The 2-D sprite of the AI interviewer agent
changes into a microphone emoji when it is the participant's turn to respond, with the white circle pulsating to match
the level of the participant's audio being captured. c) Progress bar and subtitles: A 2-D sprite map shows the
participant's visual avatar traveling from one end point to the other in a straight line, indicating progress. The
interface also features options to display subtitles or pause the interview.

Implementation
     We implemented the interviewer agent as a web application in our study platform, providing

voice-to-voice interactions with audio and microphone capabilities through an audio Zoom-like
interface. Low-latency voice-to-voice interviews were crucial for giving participants the feeling
of actually talking to an interviewer and helping the AI interviewer agent form rapport with the
interviewee (46). Before the interview, our platform disclosed that our interviewer is an AI, and
conducted an audio calibration by asking participants to read aloud the first two lines of The
Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald.

                                                                                                                    7
     The interview interface displayed the 2-D sprite avatar representing the interviewer agent at
the center, with the participant's avatar shown at the bottom, walking towards a goal post to
indicate progress (see Figure 3). When the AI interviewer agent was speaking, it was signaled by
a pulsing animation of the center circle with the interviewer avatar. When it was the participant's
turn to speak, the interviewer avatar changed to a microphone emoji and pulsed to match the
audio being recorded, indicating the sound level registered from the participant. If the participant
stopped speaking and silence lasted for longer than 4 seconds, the circle gradually faded, and the
audio recording for the participant's utterance stopped. At this point, a loading animation
appeared while generating the AI interviewer agent's next utterance. Our interviewer agent
generally responded within 4 seconds--reasoning, generating, and returning its generated voice
responses within this time frame--to maintain a smooth interview flow. The AI interviewer
agent automatically started speaking when it was ready, with the interviewer avatar being
displayed in the circle again.

     The interview script is communicated to the AI interviewer agent as a JSON file containing
an ordered list of questions. Each question is paired with a metadata field indicating a manually
set time limit, suggesting the amount of time to be spent on each question so that the interview
can conclude within 2 hours. Every question in the script, along with the follow-up questions, is
read aloud using OpenAI's Audio model, a text-to-speech model that generates voice audio from
textual input (47). The participants' voice responses were transcribed using OpenAI's Whisper
model, a speech-to-text model that converts voice audio into text (48). This transcription allows
us to use the interview transcript to prompt the language models to determine the next
conversational move. Then, to dynamically generate reflections for the participants' responses to
the current question, we prompted OpenAI's GPT-4o language model (49) with the following
prompt (with input fields dynamically filled in):

         Here is a conversation between an interviewer and an interviewee.
         <INPUT: The transcript of the most recent part of the
         conversation>

         Task: Succinctly summarize the facts about the interviewee based
         on the conversation above in a few bullet points -- again, think
         short, concise bullet points.

And to dynamically generate new questions, we prompted GPT-4o with a prompt that looks as
follows:

         Meta info:
         Language: English
         Description of the interviewer (Isabella): friendly and curious
         Notes on the interviewee: <INPUT: Reflection notes about the
         participant>

         Context:
         This is a hypothetical interview between the interviewer and an
         interviewee. In this conversation, the interviewer is trying to

                                                                                                                    8
         ask the following question: "<INPUT: The question in the
         interview script>"

         Current conversation:
         <INPUT: The transcript of the most recent part of the
         conversation>
         =*=*=
         Task Description:
         Interview objective: By the end of this conversation, the
         interviewer has to learn the following: <INPUT: Repeat of the
         question in the interview script, paraphrased as a learning
         objective>
         Safety note: In an extreme case where the interviewee
         *explicitly* refuses to answer the question for privacy reasons,
         do not force the interviewee to answer by pivoting to other
         relevant topics.

         Output the following:
         1) Assess the interview progress by reasoning step by step --
         what did the interviewee say so far, and in your view, what would
         count as the interview objective being achieved? Write a short
         (3~4 sentences) assessment on whether the interview objective is
         being achieved. While staying on the current topic, what kind of
         follow-up questions should the interviewer further ask the
         interviewee to better achieve your interview objective?
         2) Author the interviewer's next utterance. To not go too far
         astray from the interview objective, author a follow-up question
         that would better achieve the interview objective.

On average, with this implementation, our AI interviewer agent spoke 5372.59 (std=2406.12)
words during the interview, asking on average 81.71 (std=54.39) follow-up questions from 99
scripted questions, to which our participants responded with on average 6491.19 words
(std=2540.56).

Development Process and Evaluation
     We iteratively refined and assessed the performance of the AI interviewer agent using a

sample of 3 waves of 3 pilot interviews conducted between August 2023 to November 2023. Of
the pilot interviews, 10 were conducted by human interviewers and 25 by the AI interviewer
agent. The resulting interview transcripts were evaluated by members of our research team who
were trained in the social sciences and assessed for their performance as training data for
generative agents on the same set of attitudinal and behavioral tasks presented in the main results
of this article. We compared the quality of the AI Interviewer interview transcripts to transcripts
of interviews performed by expert human interviewers as part of the American Voices Project.
By the end of this pilot stage, our team concluded that the quality of the transcripts produced by
the AI interviewer agent compared well with those produced by human interviewers.

                                                                                                                    9
Additionally, in our pilot studies the performance of the generative agents of real people created
using transcripts collected by the AI interviewer agent matched those created using transcripts
collected by human interviewers when predicting GSS responses. For instance, our deployed AI
interviewer agent could maintain a smooth conversation, ask relevant follow-up questions when
participants' responses were terse, and navigate sympathetically after hearing about a difficult
experience. This can be seen from an excerpt of an interview for the first question of the
interview--only the first interviewer question is scripted, while the subsequent utterances from
the interviewer are generated:

         [Interviewee]: I was raised in a rural town in [Redacted] where there are actually more
         cows than people. I'm [Redacted] years old, so I am a child of the 70s and 80s. I wound
         up being a latchkey kid and was largely raised either by myself or by daycare and
         babysitters. Childhood was not really great and I was really glad to move on to high
         school.

         [Interviewer]: I'm sorry to hear that childhood wasn't great for you. Could you tell me
         more about your experiences in high school? What was it like for you there, and were
         there any particular events or people that had a significant impact on your life during that
         time?

         [Interviewee]: So I had a head injury while I was in elementary school and the full
         weight of that untreated injury came to bear when I was in about 8th grade and I started
         having these really bad mood swings. So I spent most of my high school years in deep
         depression and no one got me any help for it. It was pretty awful. I excelled in English, in
         theater, did pretty well in science, won a lot of awards at the end of the school time when
         it was time to graduate. Didn't have the greatest GPA because I had a habit of skipping
         classes and not doing any homework but acing finals. Particular events or people that had
         a significant impact, I would say that the album Pink Floyd The Wall pretty much helped
         me with my really terrible mood. I felt understood by that music. And I had two high
         school sweethearts. One was a boy and one was a girl. So they made a big impact. One of
         them I'm no longer in touch with and today is the girl's birthday.

         [Interviewer]: Thank you for sharing that with me. It sounds like high school was a
         particularly challenging yet formative time for you. After high school, what path did you
         take with your education? Did you go to college, or did you jump straight into a career?

         [Interviewee]: After high school I went off to college originally to study criminal justice,
         but I changed over to English literature with a concentration in behavioral studies. After
         college, well, during college I had a bunch of different jobs. I worked with radioactive
         waste disposal, I worked at a woman's bookstore, I worked at a nightclub. I went off to
         law school and was there until I had to take a leave of absence because of my bipolar
         disorder, which was finally diagnosed. Years later, like 20 years later, I wound up going
         back to school again and got a business degree, mainly because I thought it would be fun
         to do. In the meantime, between law school and going back to business school, I worked
         as a legislative aide. I was a legislation director for a state senator and I wrote bills and
         got them passed into law. Then I took over my parents' business as a manager when my

                                                                                                                   10
         dad got breast cancer. After I worked as a manager there and I moved out of state in order
         to get married, I wound up buying into that business, so now I'm a part owner of the
         motel business where I'd started working when I was 15 as a housekeeper, so it's kind of
         gone full circle. Now I'm going to be working as a part-time firearms instructor.

3. Generative Agent Architecture
     Generative agents are software systems that simulate human behavior, powered by a

language model augmented with a set of memories to define their behaviors (14, 15). These
memories, stored in a database (or "memory stream") in text form, are retrieved as needed to
generate the agent's behaviors using a language model. This is paired with a reflection module
that synthesizes these memories into reflections, selecting portions or all of the text in the agents'
memories to prompt a language model to infer useful insights, thereby enhancing the
believability of the agents' behaviors. While traditional agents in agent-based models rely on
manually articulated behavior in specific scenarios, generative agents leverage language models
to produce human-like responses that reflect the personas described in their memories across a
wide range of circumstances. In this work, we aimed to build generative agents that accurately
predict individuals' attitudes and behaviors by using detailed information from participants'
interviews and/or survey responses to seed the agents' memories, effectively tasking generative
agents to role-play as the individuals that they represent.

Figure 4. The architecture of our generative agents involves taking a question as input and outputting a prediction of
how the source participant might respond, using a language model. Each agent's memory comprises the self-report
data and the outputs of expert reflections over that data. These reflections are short syntheses generated using a
language model, designed to infer insights about the participants that might not be explicitly stated. The personas of
expert social scientists (e.g., psychologist, behavioral economist) guide these reflections.

Expert Reflection
     Prompting the language model with participants' self-report datato predict their responses in

a single chain of thought may cause the model to overlook latent information not explicitly stated
by the participant. To explicitly infer high-level, more abstract insights about the participants
embedded in the self-report data, we introduced a variant of generative agents' reflection module
called "expert reflection." In this module, we prompt the model to generate reflections on a

                                                                                                                   11
participant's data, but instead of simply asking the model to infer insights from the data, we ask
it to adopt the persona of a domain expert. Specifically, we ask the model to generate four sets of
reflections, each time taking on the persona of a different domain expert from four branches of
social sciences: psychologist, behavioral economist, political scientist, and demographer. These
sets of reflections synthesize insights relevant to the domain represented by each expert. For
instance, for one interview transcript, the expert personas generated different insights:

         Psychologist: "[Redacted] values his independence and expresses a clear preference for
         autonomy, particularly highlighted by his enjoyment of traveling for his job and his
         frustration with his mother's overprotectiveness. This suggests a strong desire for
         personal freedom and self-determination."

         Behavioral Economist: "[Redacted]'s aspiration to save for a relaxing vacation and
         possibly advance to a managerial position indicates a blending of practical financial goals
         with personal leisure aspirations, emphasizing balanced life satisfaction."

         Political Scientist: "[Redacted] identifies as a Republican and espouses strong support for
         the party's views, particularly around immigration and drug policy. However, he also
         expresses specific support for traditionally Democratic positions on issues like abortion
         rights and the legalization of marijuana, suggesting a blend of ideologies."

         Demographer: "[Redacted] works as an inventory specialist and earns between $3,000 to
         $5,000 monthly, contributing to a household income of around $7,000 per month. He
         works primarily at Home Depots but has a varied work schedule, indicating some job
         stability and flexibility."

For every participant, we generated these four sets of reflections by prompting GPT-4o with the
participants' self-report data and asking it to generate up to 20 observations or reflections for
each of the four experts. The prompt, tailored for each expert, was similar to the following (for
the demographer expert):

         Imagine you are an expert demographer (with a PhD) taking notes
         while observing this interview. Write observations/reflections
         about the interviewee's demographic traits and social status.
         (You should make more than 5 observations and fewer than 20.
         Choose the number that makes sense given the depth of the
         interview content above.)

We generated these reflections once and saved them in the agents' memory. Whenever we
needed to predict the participants' responses to a question, we first classified, by prompting the
language model, which domain expert (demographer, psychologist, behavioral economist, or
political scientist) would best answer the question. We then retrieved all reflections generated by
that particular expert. Along with the self-report data, these sets of reflections informed the
language model's generation of predictions for the participants' responses. After retrieval, we
appended the reflections to the participants' data and used this to prompt GPT-4o to generate
responses.

                                                                                                                   12
Generating a Prediction With Generative Agents
Our prompting strategy leveraged the chain-of-thought prompting approach. For example, when
using an interview transcript, we used the following prompt:

         <INPUT: Participant's interview transcript and relevant expert
         reflections>

         =====

         Task: What you see above is an interview transcript. Based on the
         interview transcript, I want you to predict the participant's
         survey responses. All questions are multiple choice, and you must
         guess from one of the options presented.

         As you answer, I want you to take the following steps:
         Step 1) Describe in a few sentences the kind of person that would
         choose each of the response options. ("Option Interpretation")
         Step 2) For each response option, reason about why the
         Participant might answer with that particular option. ("Option
         Choice")
         Step 3) Write a few sentences reasoning on which of the options
         best predicts the participant's response. ("Reasoning")
         Step 4) Predict how the participant will actually respond in the
         survey. Predict based on the interview and your thoughts.
         ("Response")

         Here are the questions:

         <INPUT: Question we are trying to respond to>

To predict numerical responses, we modified the ending and prompted:

         [... Same as the categorical response prompt]

         As you answer, I want you to take the following steps:
         Step 1) Describe in a few sentences the kind of person that would
         choose each end of the range. ("Range Interpretation")
         Step 2) Write a few sentences reasoning on which option best
         predicts the participant's response. ("Reasoning")
         Step 3) Predict how the participant will actually respond.
         Predict based on the interview and your thoughts. ("Response")

         Here are the questions:

                                                                                                                   13
         <INPUT: Question we are trying to respond to>

Finally, if the agents needed to maintain context from the experimental stimuli for the behavioral
experiments, we appended the agents' received stimuli and prior actions in the experiments at the
end of the self-report data and reflections in natural language form.

4. Surveys and Experimental Constructs
     To evaluate the fidelity of our generative agents, we aimed to assess their predictive

accuracy regarding the attitudes and behaviors of the underlying sample across surveys and
experimental constructs from a broad array of social scientific disciplines and methods. To
operationalize this, we identified four existing constructs commonly deployed in the social
sciences. In this section, we describe them. As discussed in the manuscript, when we evaluate on
constructs that are used in the input for the agents, we ensure to remove the question we predict
on from the input (for the GSS), and all questions in the same question block (for the Big5).

The General Social Survey
     The General Social Survey (GSS) is a long-running, widely used sociological survey

administered biannually to representative cross sections of U.S. adults to collect information
encompassing demographic details and respondents' viewpoints on issues such as government
spending, race relations, and beliefs concerning the existence and nature of God (20, 50). The
survey consists of a repeated "core" module, run every cycle, that covers the more timeless
elements of the survey, along with additional modules that are swapped in and out to meet the
needs of the year when the survey is administered. Traditionally, the survey was conducted via
voice, with the surveyor asking the questions in person or on the phone and later coding the
participants' responses into discrete survey question and answer pairs. In recent years (since the
COVID-19 pandemic, when in-person contact was challenging), the GSS has been implemented
and administered online (51). The ability to predict GSS responses signifies a comprehensive
understanding of individuals, particularly in areas of interest to social scientists (50). It also
signifies the ability of our agents to predict the participants' responses to survey constructs on
topics related to societal issues and personal views.

     In our study, we focused on the GSS Core as it represents the most enduring and important
set of survey questions within the GSS. While some questions within the GSS allow for
qualitative responses or freeform input, our study specifically focused on questions that ask for
structured responses in the form of categorical or numerical answers. These questions can be
quantitatively assessed, making them the primary focus of our evaluation efforts. Consequently,
we excluded: 1) conditional questions that depend on answers to other questions, 2) questions
with more than 25 option categories, and (3) questions requiring free-form responses. This
refinement process resulted in a final analytic sample of 177 categorical questions and 6
numerical questions. Following recent best practice (51), we administered these questions online
through a custom-built Qualtrics survey linked from our study platform.

                                                                                                                   14
Big Five Personality Traits
     The Big Five personality traits are a widely recognized framework in psychology for

understanding human personality (21). The construct encompasses five broad dimensions that
capture substantial variability in individuals' personalities: openness to experience,
conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. Each trait represents a range,
with individuals receiving a score for each trait. The Big Five traits have been validated across
diverse cultures and are used to predict a wide range of behaviors and life outcomes, from
academic and job performance to social relationships and mental health (21). Traditionally, these
traits are assessed using self-report questionnaires where respondents rate their agreement with
each statement on a Likert scale. The ability to accurately predict an individual's Big Five
personality traits is central for psychologists and researchers (52, 54), as it provides insights into
human behavior, informs interventions, enhances personal development, and contributes to the
understanding of social dynamics.

     In our study, we used the 44-item version of the questionnaire for testing the Big Five
personality traits (BFI-44), developed by Oliver John and Sanjay Srivastava in 1998 (21). We
administered all 44 questions in the BFI-44 through a custom-built Qualtrics form linked from
our study platform. Using the participants' responses to these questions, we calculated the scores
following the aggregation methods suggested in the original work.

Behavioral Economic Games
     Behavioral economic games are a set of experimental tools to study decision-making and

social behavior under real stakes. Each game is designed to reveal aspects of human social
behavior such as altruism, trust, cooperation, and competition. Participants engage in these
games with real financial incentives. In our study, we offered participants a bonus payment based
on their choices in the games. This incentive helps ensure that participants' choices reflect
genuine preferences and strategies. These economic games are pivotal in understanding the
underlying motivations and behavioral patterns in economic decision-making, providing valuable
data for social scientists in multiple fields (52).

     In our study, we included the following five economic games, chosen for their prominence
in the academic community:

     Dictator Game (22): This game measures altruism by allowing one player (the dictator) to
         decide how to split a sum of money between themselves and another participant. The
         participants are initially given $5 and decide how to split the $5 between themselves and
         one other participant. The other participant cannot affect the outcome chosen.

     The Trust Game (First Mover) (23): This game assesses trust, with the First Mover
         deciding how much of an initial endowment to send to the Second Mover. Player 1 is
         initially given $3 and then chooses how many dollars, if any, to send to Player 2, another
         participant in the study. Unlike the Dictator Game, the sum sent is tripled, so for every $1
         sent, Player 2 receives $3.

     The Trust Game (Second Mover) (23): This game assesses reciprocity, with the Second
         Mover deciding how much of the tripled amount received from the First Mover to return.
         This game continues from the actions of the First Mover in the Trust Game, as described
         above.

                                                                                                                   15
     The Public Goods Game (24): This game explores cooperative behavior by having
         participants decide how much of their private endowment to contribute to a common
         pool. Participants are randomly assigned to interact with three other participants, with
         everyone receiving the same instructions. Each person in the group is given $4 for this
         interaction. They each decide how much of the $4 to keep for themselves and how much
         (if any) to contribute to the group's common task. All money contributed to the common
         task is doubled and then split among the four group members. The money is equally
         distributed among all players, regardless of individual contributions.

     The Prisoner's Dilemma (25): This game examines the tension between cooperation and
         self-interest. Each of two participants chooses whether to cooperate or defect. If both
         cooperate, they receive a moderate payoff of $6. If one defects while the other
         cooperates, the defector receives a high payoff of $8, and the cooperator receives a low
         payoff of $2. If both defect, they receive a low payoff of $4.

     We administered all five games through a custom-built Qualtrics form linked from our study
platform and calculated the bonus amount afterward. At the start of the five games, we informed
participants that we would randomly select one of the five studies to calculate their bonuses, but
we did not tell them which game would be selected. Each game offered a maximum bonus of $8
to $10. After the study, we randomly paired participants and used the Dictator Game to calculate
the bonus amount--the selection of the Dictator Game was randomly determined by us prior to
the study. The bonus amount was based on participants' actual earnings in that game.

Replication Studies of Experimental Treatment Effects
     Experiments involving randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of interventions ("treatments")

with human subjects are standard across the social sciences. In a typical case, study participants
are randomly assigned to either a treatment group or a control group, ensuring that outcome
differences can be attributed to the intervention and minimizing confounding variables.
Somewhat more formally, in this basic example, random assignment ensures that treatment
assignment (Z) is independent of the observed outcomes (Y(1) for treatment or Y(0) for control)
conditional on any set of observed or unobserved covariates (X) (i.e., {(0), (1)}|) (47).
Researchers often estimate treatment effects by calculating the difference between the average
(mean) outcome in the treatment group and control group. Estimates of treatment effects from
rigorous, well-replicated studies support evidence-based practice in social sciences like
psychology and guide policy decisions and clinical recommendations (55, 56). By predicting
such effects with generative agents, we evaluate whether individual agent behaviors also exhibit
(aggregate) responses to interventions in ways that accurately simulate human samples.

     Our analytic sample of the replication studies. In our study, we selected a sample of human
behavioral experiments from a recent large-scale replication effort of experimental studies that
were published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences as curated by Camerer et
al. (26). Each study had at least one clear hypothesis and a significant reported effect. Sampling
from the studies replicated by Camerer et al. ensured that 1) we did not subconsciously choose
studies more favorable to the generative agents; 2) all estimates of treatment effects among
human study participants had already been replicated in pre-registered studies conducted by

                                                                                                                   16
independent research teams and subjected to peer review; and 3) the interventions we tested were
drawn from multiple social scientific disciplines.

The Camerer et al. project replicated 41 studies in total. Among these, we selected studies based
on two criteria: first, the study had to be describable in natural language (optionally with images)
for processing by a language model; second, the power analysis from the replication effort
suggested that the effects would be observable with 1,000 or fewer participants. The criteria
ensured that our sample of 1,000 human participants and the corresponding 1,000 generative
agents could replicate the effect if present. These filters resulted in the following five studies in
our sample of experiments:

     Ames & Fiske, 2015 (27): This study examines how perceived intent affects the
         evaluation of harm. Participants read a vignette about a nursing home employee who
         switched patients' medications. One group was told the switch was intentional, while the
         other was told it was unintentional. After reading the vignette, participants were asked to
         complete their choice of five tasks, such as providing opinions about how the nurse
         should be blamed and punished or taking a short quiz about the cost of healthcare in the
         U.S. The study found that those who read the intentional scenario were more likely to
         choose tasks related to assigning blame and punishment compared to those who read the
         unintentional scenario.

     Cooney et al., 2016 (28): This study explores how perceived fairness affects emotional
         responses. In a modified dictator game, participants believed they were receivers and
         predicted whether they would feel less upset about not receiving a bonus if the decision
         was made fairly (by a coin flip) rather than unfairly (by personal choice). The study
         found that participants expected fairness to influence their feelings, anticipating less upset
         when the decision was perceived as fair.

     Halevy & Halali, 2015 (29): This study examines the perceived benefits and costs of
         intervening in conflicts. Participants recalled their personal experience of either
         intervening or not intervening in a conflict between friends and were asked to assess how
         beneficial it was to intervene in the conflict. The results showed that those who recalled
         intervening perceived the intervention as more beneficial and less costly than those who
         did not intervene.

     Rai et al., 2017 (30): This study explores how dehumanization affects participants'
         willingness to harm others. In a vignette-based experiment, participants were given a
         description of a person in a dehumanized manner, simply as a "man," or a description of
         a person in a humanized manner with details about the person such as "John is a
         29-year-old man with brown hair and brown eyes. People who know him would describe
         him as ambitious and imaginative..." Participants were then asked whether they would be
         willing to harm the person for monetary compensation. The study found that participants
         were more willing to harm a stranger described in dehumanized terms compared to one
         described in humanized terms when motivated by financial gain.

     Schilke et al., 2015 (31): This study investigates how power influences trust in social
         exchanges. Participants, imagining themselves as typists, were divided into high-power
         and low-power groups based on financial need and job availability. In the high-power
         condition, participants' service was essential for their clients, and they were offering the
         service to make extra spending money. In the low-power condition, participants' service
         was non-essential for their clients, and they were offering the service to make ends meet.

                                                                                                                   17
         Trust was measured by the willingness to provide a free sample of their service to a
         potential client. The results showed that participants in the high-power condition were
         less willing to offer a free sample.

     Our platform randomly assigned the participants to a condition for each of the five studies
and we administered all five experiments through a custom-built Qualtrics form linked from our
study platform.

5. Evaluation Methods

     Given our survey and experimental constructs, we set out to evaluate the predictive power
of the generative agents. In this section, we describe the metrics and evaluation methods used for
this purpose. The individual subsection headers in this section are organized to match the
presentation in the main document.

Predicting Individuals' Attitudes and Behaviors
     To determine whether generative agents of the 1,000 human participants accurately predict

their respective individuals' behaviors and attitudes, we utilized the GSS, BFI-44, and five
economic games. We deployed our generative agents to predict their respective individuals'
responses to questions in these surveys and behavioral constructs. However, this measurement
poses challenges due to variability in human participants' responses (36, 37). To address this, our
evaluation employs the following strategy:

1) We use participants' responses from the first phase of participation to assess the accuracy
    rate of our agents' predictions--the number of answers predicted correctly over the total
    number of questions.

2) We use the second phase of participation to assess individuals' rate of internal
    consistency--the participants' rate of prediction on the battery of surveys and
    experiments used in this study.

3) We then calculate the normalized accuracy as follows:

normalized accuracy =  '  
                             

Conceptually, a normalized accuracy of 1.0 means that the generative agent predicts the
individual's responses as accurately as the person replicates their own responses two weeks later.

     The diverse response types in our surveys and experimental constructs present a challenge
in determining a single metric for assessing our agents' predictive accuracy. For instance, while
the categorical-ordinal responses in the GSS are well-suited to accuracy rates, numerical
responses in other constructs are better evaluated using Mean Absolute Error (MAE) or
correlation coefficients. To address this, we developed a reporting approach that satisfies the
following criteria:

1) Report metrics appropriate for each response type (e.g., accuracy rate for categorical,
    MAE for numerical).

                                                                                            18
2) Ensure metric interpretability across different community norms (e.g., accuracy/MAE in
    machine learning literature, correlation in social science literature).

3) Provide a metric allowing comparison across different constructs.

To meet these criteria, we report accuracy rates for evaluation constructs with categorical-ordinal
response types, MAE for numerical response types, and Pearson correlation coefficient as a
metric comparable across constructs. Additionally, we present these metrics alongside the
normalized accuracy to provide a comprehensive evaluation of our agents' performance.

     Our analysis primarily focuses on individual-level analyses, conducted for each participant
and then aggregated across the population. We calculate accuracy measurements for each
individual and average these values across all participants. Additionally, we report and discuss
construct-level analyses, which involve calculating accuracy measurements for the population
and measuring the average predictive accuracy for individual questions, dimensions, or games in
the constructs, averaged across all agents in the agent bank. In essence, the individual-level
analysis answers "For the average person, how accurate are the generative agents?", whereas the
construct-level analysis answers "For a specific item in one construct, how accurate are the
generative agents?" In the main body of the article, we report the individual-level analysis, as our
goal is to generalize over the individuals in our population rather than over items.

Averaging correlation coefficients presents a challenge due to their non-linear nature. To

address this, we employ Fisher's z-transformation, which converts correlation coefficients to a

scale where they can be averaged linearly (57). The process involves:

1) Applying Fisher's z-transformation to each correlation coefficient:  =  1  (  1 +   )
                                                                           2     1 - 

2) Calculating the average of the z-values.

3) Applying the inverse Fisher's z-transformation to the average z-value:  = ()

     Below, we describe in more detail the evaluation methods and our reporting strategies for
the individual constructs.

     The General Social Survey. The subset of the core module of the GSS that fits our inclusion
criteria, as described in the prior section, includes 183 questions, most of which--177--are
categorical or ordinal (categorical-ordinal) response types, with the remaining 6 being
numerical. As such, we report the accuracy rate and correlation coefficient for the categorical
response type variables in the GSS, and separately report the MAE and correlation coefficient for
the 6 numerical response type variables.

     To calculate the accuracy of the categorical-ordinal GSS questions, we consider our
prediction accurate and the participant consistent if the responses match exactly. The accuracy
rate is the ratio of correctly predicted items divided by the total number of items. For
correlations, we translated categorical and ordinal questions into numerical forms. For
categorical variables, each response option is first transformed into a separate binary variable.
For example, if a categorical variable has five response options, we create five binary variables,
each indicating whether the participant selected that option. These binary variables are coded as
0 or 1. However, to prevent these binary variables from disproportionately influencing the
overall correlation due to their higher count, we adjust their weights. Each binary variable is

                                                                                                 19
assigned a weight such that the total weight for all variables combined equals that of the original
categorical variable, ensuring fair representation. In this example, each binary variable would
receive a weight of 0.25. For ordinal questions, we normalize the responses to a range between 0
and 1 by evenly spacing the options. This ensures that the ordinal responses maintain their
inherent order and distance between options while fitting into a numerical scale. We then apply
the same weighting principles when calculating the correlation between the participants' original
responses and their later self-consistency responses to ensure conformity across variable types.

     To calculate the MAE for the numerical GSS questions, we first normalize the participants'
responses to a 0 to 1 scale relative to the range of historical responses to the respective question
as indicated on the official NORC site for the GSS. For instance, for the question "Your age," if
the historical minimum value was 18 and the maximum was 89, an age of 30 would be
normalized to 0.17 accordingly. We use these normalized values to calculate the MAE across the
questions and responses. Similarly, we calculate the MAE between the participants' responses
and predictions, and between the participants' responses and their self-consistency responses.

     Using these measurements for our predictions and the participants' internal consistency, we
calculate the normalized accuracy. However, we note that normalized accuracy cannot be
computed for MAE, as some rows contain internal consistency values of 0 (when there is no
variation, meaning the participant gave the same response in both the test and retest), making the
denominator 0. Therefore, we report the normalized accuracy only for accuracy and the
correlation coefficient.

     When we use as input any GSS questions from the first survey wave while predicting on the
GSS in the second wave, we ensure that the question we are predicting on is not in the input for
the agents.

     BFI-44. Each dimension in the five-dimension measurement of the BFI-44 is provided as a
scale ranging from 1 to 5. These scales are calculated based on the participants' responses to the
44 questions in BFI-44. To calculate these scales, we first reverse-code certain items as specified
in the original work. After reverse coding, we aggregate the responses by taking the average for
each dimension. Then, we use these averaged scales to calculate and report the MAE and
correlation coefficient of the five scales. As with the GSS, we only report the normalized
accuracy for the correlation coefficient. When we use as input any Big5 questions from the first
survey wave while predicting on the Big5 in the second wave, we ensure that the question we are
predicting or any other questions in the same personality grouping on are not in the input for the
agents.

     Economic games. The five economic games include numerical (dictator game, trust games,
public goods) and dichotomous (prisoner's dilemma) response types. To normalize these into one
construct, we first normalize the responses for each game to a 0 to 1 scale using the minimum
and maximum values offered to the participants as min and max. Then, we use the normalized
values to calculate the MAE and correlation coefficient. Again, as with the GSS, we only report
the normalized accuracy for the correlation coefficient.

                                                                                                                   20
Replicating Experiments With Generative Agents
    Do generative agents predict the behavior of sample average treatment effects? To study this,

we use the responses from the human participants in our study to directly run a replication of the
five sampled experiments, rather than using the published results. This direct replication is
important because our sample might be different, and some studies may not replicate. To the
extent that some of these studies are not replicated by the agents, this approach allows us to
distinguish whether the failed replication was due to the original study not replicating, or
whether the failure to replicate instead lay with the agents.

     In this evaluation, we are interested in three related outcomes: whether the effect direction
and significance replicate, and whether there is a correlation between effect sizes. The five
studies have different statistics, so we use the same statistical methods as in the original papers to
derive the p-values for the effects' significance. We briefly describe these methods here.
Consistent with the original replication studies conducted by Camerer et al., we calculate and
compare all effect sizes in terms of Cohen's d.

     Ames & Fiske, 2015 (27): A chi-square test (2-test) of equal proportions to evaluate the
         hypothesis by comparing the number of participants choosing the blame task between the
         two experimental conditions.

     Cooney et al., 2016 (28): An F-test on the Outcome x Procedure interaction within a 2x2
         ANOVA design, which evaluates how the predicted feelings about fairness (receiving or
         not receiving a bonus) interact with the allocation procedure (fair or unfair).

     Halevy & Halali, 2015 (29): An independent samples t-test to compare the perceived
         benefits of intervening in a conflict between two friends across two treatment groups
         (those who did intervene and those who did not).

     Rai et al., 2017 (30): An independent samples t-test to compare participants' willingness
         to harm a stranger described in humanized versus dehumanized terms under instrumental
         motives.

     Schilke et al., 2015 (31): A chi-square test (2-test) to compare the levels of trust between
         participants with high structural power and those with low structural power.

     We report which of the studies our human participants and simulated predictions replicated
with significant results. To understand how well the effect sizes are correlated, we calculate the
Pearson correlation coefficient between the effect sizes from the human participants and
simulated participants.

Interviews Improve Agents' Prediction Accuracy
     Interviews provide qualitative data expressed in participants' own words, but to what extent

do interviews improve agents' predictive capabilities? To address this question, we present two
sets of analyses:

    1) A main analysis where we compare the interview agents we presented in the main paper
         to agents created using the known practices from recent literature that studied human
         behavioral simulations with language models.

                                                                                                                   21
    2) Exploratory analyses conducted on a random subset of 100 agents in the agent bank,
         investigating a broader range of design spaces. This includes examining generative agents
         with interview lesions and agents informed by survey data instead of interview data.

The main analysis aims to establish a baseline for predictive performance grounded in prior
literature and evaluate whether our agent architecture surpasses this benchmark.

     Main analysis. Alongside interview based, survey based, and survey + interview based, we
evaluate two alternative agent descriptors: participants' demographic information and persona
descriptions. To operationalize demographic information, we reconstruct agent descriptions
following a method representative of approaches used in recent literature that employ language
models to simulate human behavior. This method, similar to that presented by Argyle et al.,
constructs a first-person descriptor including political ideology, race, gender, and age (28). For
example:

         Ideologically, I describe myself as conservative. Politically, I
         am a strong Republican. Racially, I am white. I am male. In terms
         of age, I am 50 years old.

We reconstruct these descriptors for our participants using their responses to the GSS. Then, to
prompt the language model with this data, we replace any other self-report data with the
demographic descriptors.

     To operationalize persona descriptions, we asked participants to write a short paragraph
about themselves at the end of their phase 1 participation in surveys and experiments. They were
instructed to describe themselves as they might to a stranger, including information about their
personal background, personality, and demographics. For instance:

         I am a 20 year old from new york city. I come from a working
         middle class family, I like sports and nature a lot. I also like
         to travel and experience new restaurants and cafes. I love to
         spend time with my family and I value them a lot, I also have a
         lot of friends which are very kind and caring. I live in the city
         but I love to spend time outdoors and in nature. I live with both
         parents and my younger sister.

     Given this, we leverage both demographic agents and persona agents to predict participants'
responses at the individual level. To compare performance differences between these agent
versions, we conducted an ANOVA with post hoc Tukey tests, examining differences between
architectures on the main evaluation metrics. This comparison was made between agents created
with interviews, demographic information, persona descriptions, and survey data.

     Exploratory robustness analysis. The primary goal for this exploratory analysis is to
understand, in a more exhaustive manner, why the interview and survey based agents are
performant. We conducted this analysis on a random sample of 100 agents from our agent bank,
comparing agents informed by different data sources. Each comparison aims to shed light on a

                                                                                                                   22
particular question about the efficacy of agents with richer background information in generating
predictive agents. We compare the following agent types in this robustness check (results shown
in SM table 6):

     Survey Agents. To investigate whether interviews are a uniquely powerful medium or if
         similar information can be captured through surveys, we created composite descriptions
         by compiling participants' responses to two components used in our study--the GSS and
         Big Five personality test. This approach aligns with traditional social science methods,
         which have developed and validated structured surveys to efficiently gather information
         from participants. We aimed to determine if these established methods capture
         comparable information to our interview-based agents. In other words, do the interviews
         capture the same predictive power, more, or less, than these common validated
         instruments?

         Survey agents were constructed using respondents' wave 1 answers to the GSS and
         Big-5, and evaluated on their wave 2 responses. For the GSS, we test two different
         strategies for constructing the agents. First, we remove only the outcome question we
         predict from the input data for the agent. By doing so, the agent will have access to
         information related to the outcome questions. For example, when predicting how an agent
         will respond to: "If a man and woman have sex relations before marriage, do you think it
         is always wrong, almost always wrong, wrong only sometimes, or not wrong at all?", the
         agent will know the answer to "What if they are in their early teens, say 14 to 16 years
         old? In that case, do you think sex relations before marriage are always wrong, almost
         always wrong, wrong only sometimes, or not wrong at all?"

         Second, we hold-out the whole GSS module a given outcome question is in. This
         approach means the survey agents have fewer access to similar questions than the
         interview agents have, whereas the first strategy ensures the survey agents have access to
         more similar questions than the interview agents. For the Big-5 we always hold-out the
         whole block of questions asking about a particular personality trait when predicting an
         outcome question within that trait.

         Compared to the interview agents, the first approach gives the survey agents more access
         to questions similar to the one being predicted: questions within the same GSS block tap
         similar topics and are asked in a similar close-ended fashion, whereas American Voices
         Project and GSS use different questioning styles. In the second approach, survey based
         agents have access to fewer similar questions, as there is little thematic overlap between
         GSS modules, while the American Voices Project and GSS do touch upon similar topics.

     Survey agents with interviews. To assess whether the information captured in
         interviews fully encompasses that from surveys and experiments, we add the interviews
         to the survey agents.

     Maximal Agents. Maximal agents combine all the data we have by adding the economic
         games alongside the interviews to the survey agents. By equipping these agents with
         access to all data sources, we aim to determine our current performance ceiling: do

                                                                                                                   23
         interviews alone capture the most relevant information, or is there added value in
         combining methods?

     Summary Agents. We investigated whether the predictive power of interviews stems
         from linguistic cues in the transcript, or from the information in the transcript . To
         explore this, we created summary agents by prompting GPT-4o to convert interview
         transcripts into bullet-pointed dictionaries of key response pairs, capturing the factual
         content while removing most linguistic features (e.g., { "childhood_town": "Small

          town", "siblings": "Only child", "marital_history": "Married twice",

         "children": "Two children, but they are not living with the interviewee"...}).
         By isolating the factual knowledge from the unique linguistic elements, we aimed to
         determine whether the predictive accuracy of the agents relies on those linguistic
         nuances. If the summary agents perform worse than the full interview-based agents, it
         would suggest that linguistic features play a key role in enhancing prediction accuracy.

     Random Lesion Interview Agents. We investigated the efficiency of interviews in
         providing insights compared to shorter data collection methods. While surveys such as
         the GSS Core typically take about 30 minutes, our interviews span two hours. To assess
         how much interview content is necessary to convey meaningful insights, we developed
         random lesion agents. These agents were created by progressively shortening interviews,
         randomly removing 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% of the question-response pairs. This
         approach allowed us to identify the threshold at which the interview becomes too sparse
         to retain valuable information.

Demographic Bias in Agent Predictions
How do individuals' demographic attributes interact with the generative agents' ability to predict
their respective behaviors and attitudes? Here, we investigated how individuals' demographic
attributes interact with the generative agents' ability to predict their behaviors and attitudes.
Specifically, we aimed to assess whether creating individualized models based on self-report data
reduces performance gaps across demographic groups, compared to relying solely on
demographic attributes or personas. To quantify these differences, we employed the
Demographic Parity Difference (DPD), a metric used in machine learning fairness literature (39,
40). DPD measures the difference in prediction rates between demographic groups, with lower
values indicating more equitable predictions.

We calculated DPD for three constructs--General Social Survey (GSS), Big Five personality
traits, and economic games--across five agent conditions: interview-based, demographic-based,
persona-based, survey+interview based, and survey based. The interview-based condition
utilized our novel approach, while the demographic and persona conditions served as baselines
from prior literature. Using demographic attributes provided by our recruitment vendor, Bovitz,
we calculated accuracy metrics for subpopulations across Studies 1 and 2. We compared these
metrics across the five agent conditions to determine if certain populations experienced worse
predictive accuracy, to quantify the extent of disparities, and to examine how these differences
interacted with the agent condition. DPD values were reported alongside individual accuracy
results for different population subgroups.

                                                                                                                   24
In addition, to assess the statistical significance of the observed differences, we conducted
regression analyses. These analyses explored the impact of demographic variables on the
predictive performance of generative agents, with separate regression models run for each
demographic variable, using predictive performance as the dependent variable.

6. Supplementary Results
In this section, we present a higher-level interpretation of supplementary results that, while not
central to our main findings, offer valuable insights. The methods are as outlined in the previous
section, and detailed tables of these results can be found in Section 8.

Numerical GSS Prediction Results
In addition to our predictive performance on the primary categorical questions of the General
Social Survey (GSS), we also evaluated our model's ability to predict responses to the six GSS
core numerical questions. The results show similarly strong predictive accuracy, with an average
correlation of r = 0.97 (std = 0.82) and an average mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.14 (std =
0.15). These metrics indicate a high degree of alignment between our predictions and the actual
GSS responses for the numerical questions.

Exploratory Robustness Analysis Results
We present supplementary findings from the exploratory robustness analysis, organized by the
materials used to inform agent behavior. Detailed results of this analysis are provided in Table 6.

     Interview agents: On the specific subsample of 100 interview agents we used for these
         robustness checks, the interview agents score a normalized accuracy of 0.82 (std = 0.13)
         on the GSS.

     Survey Agents: When excluding question-answer pairs from the same category as the
         predicted question, survey agents performed similarly compared to interview-based
         agents. Specifically, the survey agents reached a normalized accuracy on the GSS of 0.82
         (std = 0.18). When removing the whole GSS module a given outcome question is in from
         the input when predicting on that question, survey agents are worse and achieved an
         average normalized accuracy of 0.77 (std = 0.12) on the GSS.

     Survey with interviews: When including the interview transcripts to survey agents with
         only the GSS outcome question removed from the input, performance increases (0.85, std
         = 0.19). This finding suggests that adding more information does add additional
         predictive power above and beyond the interviews.

     Maximal Agents. Maximal agents, which incorporated information from surveys,
         experiments, and interviews, achieved slightly better performance than interview-based
         agents, with a normalized accuracy of 0.87 (std = 0.13) on the GSS. This finding
         reinforces that more information improves predictive performance.

     Summary Agents. The summary agents performed slightly below the interview agents,
         with a normalized accuracy of 0.81 (std = 0.13) on the GSS. This indicates that while
         some information may be lost from the linguistic cues during summarization, much of the
         performance is due to the information in the interview rather than the low level language
         that participants use.

                                                                                                                   25
     Random Lesion Interview Agents. Performance declined linearly as we removed
         increasing portions of the interview data. Starting with a normalized accuracy of 0.82 (std
         = 0.13) when no information was removed, accuracy dropped to 0.79 (std = 0.12) when
         80% of the utterances were excluded. This suggests that although performance decreases
         as interview length is reduced, even a short interview contains sufficient richness to
         outperform agents informed solely by surveys and experiments, highlighting the
         efficiency of interviews in identifying valuable insights.

Demographic Bias in Agent Predictions
We present supplementary findings on bias in agent predictions. The complete results of our
regression analysis can be found in Table 4, with demographic parity differences (DPD) detailed
in Table 5. In addition to the DPD findings outlined in the main document, our regression
analysis indicates that significant demographic performance discrepancies across constructs were
relatively rare. However, notable exceptions emerged for political ideology, party affiliation, and
sexual orientation when predicting GSS responses. Specifically, predictive performance was
noticeably stronger for participants identifying as strong liberals, strong Democrats, and
non-heterosexual/straight, compared to those identifying as more conservative, Republican, or
heterosexual/straight.

9. Deviations from the Pre-Analysis-Plan for the GSS Outcome Questions

We reduced the set of GSS outcome questions by removing those GSS questions for which there
is a synonymous question in the American Voices Project (AVP). While we pre-registered that
we would use the full GSS survey to evaluate the agents' predictions, this left open the
possibility that agents with access to the AVP interview (interview and survey-plus-interview
agents) could achieve high accuracy simply because some GSS questions were nearly identical
to those asked in the interviews. To address this potential concern, we developed a procedure to
identify and remove from the input prompt such overlapping questions from the evaluation set.
This procedure involved three steps.

First, we created all possible pairs of GSS and interview questions, resulting in 54,694 unique
pairs. We then used a GPT-4.1 model to classify whether each pair of questions is synonymous.
Research has highlighted that GPT is good at such text classification tasks (e.g. Yang et al 2025;
Gilardi et al 2023). The model was instructed to provide a binary judgment of whether two
question pairs were synonymous or not and an associated score capturing how similar the
questions are, which we used as a confidence score.1 After manually confirming the questions

1 The exact prompting instructions read: "
`[survey question]'

Task: What you see above is a survey question. Based on the survey question, I want you to assess whether the
survey question is essentially the same as the interview question listed below.

As you answer, I want you to take the following steps:
Step 1) Return a score from 0 to 100 indicating how similar the two questions are, where 0 is not at all similar and
100 is 'they are the same question'.

                                                                                                                   26
the model flagged as similar following the same coding criteria as the GPT model, this process
identified 24 GSS outcome questions for which there was an identical or nearly identical
question in the interview transcripts. For example: "Did your mother ever work for pay for as
long as a year, while you were growing up?" and "Did your mom work for pay for at least a year
while you were growing up?"

Of these 24 questions, 15 ask about the respondent's own demographic characteristics (e.g.,
employment, gender, education, religion), five concern parental education or employment, and
the remaining questions address aspects such as spousal traits, and partisanship.

Second, we assessed the risk of false negatives--cases where the model failed to flag identical or
nearly identical questions. To do this we: 1) manually reviewed all cases the model marked as
"unsure," as captured by a score different from 0, and manually assessed whether question pairs
were synonymous, following the same decision criteria as we instructed the model to follow.
This process led us to identify two additional demographic questions to remove. 2) We hired a
human coder to classify 500 question pairs (GSS and interview questions). This included all
model-flagged cases and a stratified random sample of unflagged ones, oversampling cases
where the model indicated low confidence by a factor of ten to create a set of questions that were
most likely to include false negatives. The human coder confirmed 21 of the 24 questions
flagged by the model and identified only one additional missed question (from the set of 500
pairs), which we then also removed. Identifying one false negative out of five hundred suggests
that the model is highly robust to false negatives and that we successfully removed the right set
of GSS questions. To be precise, treating the 1-in-500 miss rate as if it came from a simple
random sample yields a margin of error of ±0.4 percentage points, so even an extreme upper
bound puts the false-negative rate comfortably below 1%. To reiterate, we also manually checked
the 23 questions the model flagged to ensure there are no false-positives.

Third, we excluded the final set of 27 questions from our GSS outcome analysis.2 This revised
set, reported in the main paper, is less likely to give rise to inflated agent accuracy rates due to
direct retrieval of answers to questions. For completeness, the pre-registered models using the
full set of outcome questions are reported below in figure 6. Accuracy is 0.02 points higher when
including GSS questions that are identical to American Voices Project questions.

Crucially, we repeated the same question-identification procedure to ensure that survey agents do
not have questions in the input that are identical to those in the output. We found that no two
questions in the GSS are synonymous with each other, which is to be expected considering the
optimization for survey time with this instrument.

Step 2) Return an answer 'Same' if the question asks about the same information or 'Different' otherwise.

Here is the interview question: `[interview question]'"

2 Specifically, we remove the following GSS outcome questions:
BORN, DEGREE, DWELOWN, EDUC, FAMDIF16, HISPANIC, MADEG, MAEDUC, MARITAL, MARTYPE,
MAWRKGRW, PADEG, PAEDUC, PARTYID, RACE, REG16, RELIG, RVISITOR, RELPERSN, SEX, SPEDUC,
SPRTPRSN, SPWRKSTA, VETYEARS, VISITORS, WIDOWED, ZODIAC

                                                                                                                   27
Figure 5. GSS results from figure 2 in the main paper yet with all GSS outcome questions (as pre-registered).

Figure 6. GSS results from Figure 3 in the main paper yet with all GSS outcome questions (as pre-registered).

The complete list of 26 question pairs for which we removed the GSS question from the
evaluation set is below:

GSS question text                                              AVP question text

Were you born in this country (U.S.)?                          Were you born in the United States?

Your highest degree received                                   What is the highest degree or grade you've
                                                               completed?

Do you/Does your family own your home/apartment, pay rent, or  Does your household own or rent this home?
what?

What is the highest grade in elementary school or high school that y What is the highest degree or grade you've

ou finished and got credit for?                                completed?

                                                                                                                 28
Were you living with both your own mother and father around the      Did you live with both your own mother and father
time you were 16? If not living with both own mother and father:     when you were 16?
what happened?
                                                                     Are you of Hispanic, Latinx, or Spanish origin?
Are you Spanish, Hispanic, or Latino/Latina?
                                                                     What's the highest degree or grade your mom [OR
Your mother's highest degree received                                ADULT FEMALE LIVED WITH AT 16] completed?

What is the highest grade in elementary school or high school that   What's the highest degree or grade your mom [OR
your mother finished and got credit for?                             ADULT FEMALE LIVED WITH AT 16] completed?

Are you currently -- married, widowed, divorced, separated, or have Are you now married, widowed, divorced, separated,

you never been married?                                              or have you never been married?

Your marital type                                                    Are you now married, widowed, divorced, separated,
                                                                     or have you never been married?

Did your mother ever work for pay for as long as a year, while you   Did your mom [FIGURE AT AGE 16] work for pay
were growing up?                                                     for at least a year while you were growing up?

Your father's highest degree received                                What's the highest degree or grade your dad [OR
                                                                     ADULT MALE LIVED WITH AT 16] completed?

What is the highest grade in elementary school or high school that   What's the highest degree or grade your dad [OR
your father finished and got credit for?                             ADULT MALE LIVED WITH AT 16] completed?

Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself as a            Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself
Republican, Democrat, Independent, or what?                          as a Democrat, a Republican, an Independent, or
                                                                     what?
What race do you consider yourself?
                                                                     What race or races do you identify with?

In what state or foreign country were you living when you were 16    What was the address that you lived at when you were
years old?                                                           16 years old?

What is your religious preference? Is it Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, What religion do you identify with, if any?
some other religion, or no religion?

To what extent do you consider yourself a religious person? Are you Some people say that religion or spirituality is

...                                                                  important in their lives, for others not so much. How

                                                                     about you?

Your sex                                                             Which gender do you identify with?

What is the highest grade in elementary school or high school that   What about [PERSON X]? [Figure out the education
your spouse finished and got credit for?                             of every person in someone's household]

To what extent do you consider yourself a spiritual person? Are you  Some people say that religion or spirituality is
...                                                                  important in their lives, for others not so much. How
                                                                     about you?

                                                                                                                            29
Last week, was your spouse working full time, part time, going to  [IF APPLICABLE] Tell me all about any work
school, keeping house, or what?                                    [SPOUSE/PARTNER NAME] has right now.
                                                                   [REPEAT PROBES ABOVE]

Have you ever been on active duty for military training or service for Have you ever served on active duty in the U.S.
two consecutive months or more? If yes: what was your total time on Armed Forces, Reserves, or National Guard?
active duty?

How many visitors are there in your household?                     Tell me about the people who live with you right now,
                                                                   even people who are staying here temporarily.

Have you ever been widowed?                                        Are you now married, widowed, divorced, separated,
                                                                   or have you never been married?

Your astrological sign                                             [removed because we ask for birthday]

10. Why do interview-based generative agents work?
To investigate why interview-based generative agents outperform agents prompted only with
demographic information, we run a series of robustness checks, each designed to confirm or rule
out a specific mechanism behind interview-based agents' superior accuracy. We outline these
tests below.

Mechanism 1: Direct retrieval of answers.
The most straightforward possibility is that the model can directly locate verbatim answers to
outcome questions within the interview transcript. Qualitative interviews are designed to elicit
rich narratives, which may incidentally contain the factual content queried by, for example, the
GSS. This can occur even when the interview and GSS questions differ in wording (a divergence
we confirmed; see §9 of the SI). This feature sets qualitative interviews apart from fixed-format
questionnaires, which typically aim for concise responses to narrowly framed questions.
Historically, leveraging the rich textual data from interviews for structured quantitative analysis
required labor-intensive hand coding, but LLMs facilitate scalable processing of such texts. In
short, interview-based agents may perform well because they can retrieve direct answers from
the transcript. Consider the following example, based on the GSS item "Are you employed?" In
response to an interview question about health, a participant might say: "I am disabled. My
health is so bad that I can't even work." Despite the difference in questions, this answer can be
directly retrieved as a valid response to the GSS item.

To test this mechanism, we implement a two-step procedure. First, for a random subset of 59
agents, we generate all possible pairs between GSS outcome questions and interview-question
answers, resulting in an average of 21,713 pairs per agent.3 For each pair, we prompt a

3 Note that for this subset of 59 agents we ran 1,281,040 API queries. To minimize cost, we do not run this analysis
on the full sample. We ended up with an odd number because our API query for 60 agents was interrupted and

                                                                                                                   30
GPT-4o-mini model to classify whether the interview answer contains the information needed to
answer the GSS question. This allows us to compute, for each GSS question, the proportion of
agents for which the question was flagged as directly answerable. Second, we calculate each
agent's normalized accuracy on the GSS while progressively removing outcome questions,
starting with those most likely to have a verbatim answer in the transcript. We then compare the
performance of full interview agents to that of demographic and persona agents, who lack access
to the transcript. If direct retrieval plays a role, we expect that interview agents will lose accuracy
as questions with retrievable answers are removed, while demographic and persona agents will
remain unaffected.

needed to be re-started. As the costs of this analysis are so high, and the larger the subsample the more
representative of the full sample it is, we did not want to throw this data away.

                                                                                                                   31
Figure 7. Demographic agents (top), persona agents (middle), interview agents (bottom). The GSS-outcome
questions we remove (x-axis) when calculating the normalized accuracy (y-axis) are ranked from most to least likely
to have a verbatim answer to them somewhere in the interview transcript.

The results of this analysis are shown in Figure 7. For the interview agents (bottom facet), we
observe that dropping questions more likely to have a verbatim answer in the interview transcript
(those on the left of the x-axis) leads to a decline in normalized accuracy (y-axis). This pattern
does not hold for the demographic and persona agents, which do not have access to the interview
transcript. This suggests that direct answer retrieval is a key mechanism behind the higher
performance of interview-based agents. At the same time, full interview agents continue to
outperform the other agents even after many GSS questions are removed. For example, when 80
questions are dropped, interview agents still achieve an accuracy of 0.79, compared to 0.71 for
demographic agents. This sustained performance advantage indicates that other mechanisms,
beyond direct retrieval, also contribute to the superior accuracy of interview agents.

Mechanism 2: Reasoning based on other answers.
Next, we examine a second mechanism: even if the answer to a GSS question is not explicitly
stated in the interview transcript, full agents may still infer it from other information in the
transcript. For example, consider the GSS question: "Do you have a supervisor on your job to
whom you are directly responsible?" and the interview question and answer: "Q: Are you
enrolled in school? A: Yes, I'm at school." In this case, the LLM may infer that someone who is
currently enrolled in school is unlikely to be employed, and therefore unlikely to have a
supervisor. In other words, the model's ability to reason based on qualitative interview content
may be another key mechanism behind the superior performance of interview-based generative
agents.

To test this mechanism, we follow a two-step procedure similar to that used for direct retrieval.
First, using the same subset of 59 agents and the same set of GSS outcome questions and
interview-answer pairs, we prompt a GPT-4o-mini model to classify whether it can answer the
GSS question based on the given interview question and answer. As before, we compute, for
each GSS question, the proportion of agents for which it was flagged as answerable. Compared

                                                                                                                   32
to the previous test, we find that approximately three times as many questions are flagged.
Second, we compute the normalized accuracy of all agents on the GSS while progressively
removing outcome questions--starting with those most likely to be answerable through inference
from the interview transcript. We then compare the performance of full agents to that of
demographic and persona agents, which do not have access to interview transcripts. If inference
plays a role, we expect interview agents to perform worse as more inferable questions are
dropped, while the performance of other agents remains stable.
The results are shown in Figure 8. As with the direct retrieval test, we find that agents without
access to interview transcripts perform similarly regardless of which GSS items are removed.
Interview agents, by contrast, get progressively worse as we drop questions that are most likely
to be answerable through inference.

                                                                                                                   33
Figure 8. Demographic agents (top), persona agents (middle), interview agents (bottom). The GSS-outcome
questions we remove (x-axis) when calculating the normalized accuracy (y-axis) are ranked from most to least likely
to be able to be answered through inference based on information somewhere in the interview transcript.

                                                                                                                   34
One potential complication in interpreting these results is that (nearly) all instances of direct
retrieval also allow for inference, as shown in the table below. To better isolate the role of
inference relative to direct retrieval, we calculate normalized accuracy after removing the 30
GSS questions most likely to involve direct retrieval. We then compute accuracy again after
removing both these 30 questions and an additional 30 questions most likely to be answerable
through inference. This approach ensures that any observed drop in performance when inference
questions are removed is not simply driven by overlap with direct retrieval cases. The results
indicate that, after removing direct-retrieval questions, interview agents outperform demographic
agents by 0.095 points. When inference questions are also removed, this gap shrinks to
0.080--suggesting that inference, independent of direct retrieval, contributes meaningfully to
agent performance.

                     Inferred  Not inferred

Direct retrieval     4649      116

No direct retrieval  44596     1,221,204

Overlap between GSS-outcome question and interview question pairs where a GPT-4o-mini model has classified
that the answer to the GSS question can be directly retrieved or inferred from the answer to the interview question.

Taken together, these analyses demonstrate that interview-based generative agents outperform
demographic and persona agents because they uniquely combine the depth of semi-structured
interviews with the reasoning and retrieval capabilities of large language models. Open-ended
interviews elicit far richer and more nuanced information than closed-ended surveys, capturing
not just life facts and attitudes in a structured format, but also individuals' reasoning behind such
attitudes, long-tail life experiences that are not asked about in surveys, and the interwoven
narratives of identity, belonging, and personal history that illuminate the complex foundations of
people's attitudes. Large language models, in turn, are able to process this wealth of information
to directly retrieve answers embedded anywhere in the text and to infer plausible answers even
when they are not stated verbatim. Crucially, our results show that these two
mechanisms--direct retrieval and inference--do not fully account for the superior performance
of interview-based agents: even after excluding questions most susceptible to these mechanisms,
interview-based agents still outperform the alternatives. This suggests that additional
mechanisms remain to be identified, highlighting a valuable direction for future research.

                                             35
11. Results using different models
Throughout the main text we relied on GPT-4o because, at the time of data collection, it offered
the best balance between model capacity and computational cost. Four questions nevertheless
remain:

    1. Model tier: Would a more sophisticated--but also more expensive--reasoning model
         (e.g., o3, or o1) or GPT model (i.e. 4.1, 5) yield meaningfully higher accuracy?

    2. Model economy: Does the richness of the 6 k­word interview context allow substantially
         cheaper models (e.g., GPT4o-mini) to approach GPT-4o performance?

    3. Model drift: Are our findings specific to the exact instance of GPT-4o we used, or do
         they hold for newer instances released since?

    4. Finetuning: Does fine-tuning a model on a test set improve how well it predicts on a
         training set?

To address points one through three we replicated the General Social Survey (GSS) prediction
task on a subsample of 50 generative agents--we use 50 agents only because the costs to run the
full interviews through some of these more advanced models are substantial. All prompt
templates, chain-of-thought instructions, and temperature settings were held constant across
models; only the model parameter changed. We report the non-normalized accuracy score. These
results are shown in Figure 9.

Figure 9. GSS (repeated questions omitted) results predicted results using 50 agents on different GPT models.

Taken together, the results paint a consistent picture. The more advanced (reasoning)
models--GPT-5 (0.67), GPT-4.1 (0.67), GPT-o1 (0.67), and GPT-o3 (0.67)--outperform the
2024 GPT-4o baseline reported throughout the paper (0.66) in accuracy, but the advantage is
small and statistically indistinguishable with just 50 agents. The lighter "mini" variants show the
trade-off between cost and performance: GPT-4o-mini (0.60) and GPT-o1-mini (0.62) trail their
full counterparts by roughly two to five points, while GPT-o3-mini (0.64) and GPT-o4-mini

                                                                                                                   36
(0.64) nearly match the GPT-4o baseline. Should model prices drop further, the small--but
consistent--accuracy gains of the advanced tiers could become attractive. Finally, model drift
appears minimal: a run of GPT-4o in 2025 reproduces the original accuracy from 2024 almost
identically, with an 0.02 point decrease in performance for the newer instance of 4o (0.64 vs
0.66).
Next, we explored the impact of fine-tuning focused specifically on the outcome questions from
the GSS. We used OpenAI's out-of-the-box fine-tuning tool with one epoch and modified the
prompt to remove the reasoning and reflection components from the output, as there is no ground
truth for those. For 500 randomly selected agents, we constructed both the prompts and the
correct answers to the GSS questions. We then fine-tuned GPT-4o on these 500 agents and
evaluated it on the remaining 552 agents in the dataset. We compared the performance of these
agents to the same 552 agents in the main GSS analyses (which included reasoning and
reflection components in the prompt), as well as to a non-fine-tuned GPT-4o model run using the
exact same prompt structure that we used for the fine-tuned model. The fine-tuned model
achieved a normalized accuracy of 0.79 (std = 0.07) and a normalized correlation of 0.81 (std =
0.13). Without fine-tuning, using the same prompting strategy as in the main paper (with
reasoning and reflection), the model achieved a normalized accuracy of 0.84 (std = 0.11) and a
normalized correlation of 0.87 (std = 0.15). Without fine-tuning, but using the exact same
prompts as those used to test the fine-tuned model, we found a normalized accuracy of 0.82 (std
= 0.08) and a normalized correlation of 0.85 (std = 0.13). Overall, fine-tuning does not appear to
improve performance.

                                                                                                                   37
12. Supplementary Tables

        Age               18 to 24         25 to 34     35 to 44            45 to 54     55 to 64                  65 to 74
                          11.03%           13.88%       17.49%              19.77%       21.48%                    13.50%
 Census division        75 or more
                           2.85%       Middle Atlantic  E.N. Central        W.N. Central South Atlantic         E.S. Central
    Education          New England         12.83%                                                                   11.5%
       Race                6.65%          Mountain      18.73%              8.08%        10.08%
                       W.S. Central         5.13%                                                              Other ethnicity
     Ethnicity             8.65%                        Pacific             Foreign                                 5.80%
     Sexuality        Less than high     High school
      Gender         school graduate       graduate     15.78%              2.57%                               Other sexual
      Income               2.28%           38.88%                                                                orientation
                           White             Black      Associate/junior Bachelor's degree Graduate degree
 Neighborhood             75.95%           14.26%            college                                                1.15%
Political ideology  White/Caucasian
                                        Black/African   17.59%              26.9%        14.35%                 $100,000 to
 Political party          79.18%          American                                                                $124,999
    preference         Heterosexual        14.64%       Other                                                       8.04%

                          /straight    Gay or lesbian   9.79%                                                   Conservative
                           82.2%                                                                                   16.83%
                          Female            4.36%       Asian               Native Hawaiian American Indian
                          56.37%             Male                             or Pacific Isl. or Alaskan nat.    Republican
                    Less than $25,000      43.63%                                                                   11.6%
                                          $25,000 to    5.04%               0.48%        2.76%
                          18.83%           $34,999
                        $125,000 to         11.83%      Bisexual            Asexual      Pansexual
                                         $150,000 to
                         $149,999         $174,999      8.04%               1.72%        2.41%
                           5.05%            2.18%
                           Urban          Suburban         $35,000 to       $50,000 to       $75,000 to
                          30.88%            48.11%          $49,999           $74,999         $99,999
                                            Liberal         13.89%                             14.7%
                    Extremely Liberal                                         20.44%
                                           19.01%         $175,000 to                    $250,000 or more
                          11.31%                           $199,999         $200,000 to
                         Extremely        Democrat           1.61%           $249,999          2.18%
                       conservative                           Rural
                                           13.31%           21.13%             1.38%
                            5.8%             Other
                    Strong Democrat         2.38%       Slightly Liberal    Moderate       Slightly
                                                                             28.8%       conservative
                          21.96%                             9.32%
                    Strong Republican                                                       8.94%

                          14.83%                        Independent, close  Independent  Independent, close
                                                              to Dem.         15.59%           to Rep.

                                                              11.88%                            8.46%

Table 1. Demographic distribution of our 1,052 participants. Collectively, they represent a stratified sample of the
U.S. demographic across age, gender, race, region of residence, level of education, and political identity. Note that
for ethnicity, the participants could choose more than one option.

                                                                                                               38
              [General Social Survey: Agent Architecture Comparison (ANOVA)]

Source        Sum of Squares (SS)         df          F           p-value
Group         5.972                       2           492.55      < .001
Residual      18.813                      3103        N/A         N/A

Group 1       Group 2    Mean Difference     p-value     Lower Bound Upper Bound Reject Null
Demographics  Interview  0.0937              < .001
Demographics  Persona    -0.0001             0.999       0.0857   0.1018      Yes
Interview     Persona    -0.0939             < .001
                                                         -0.0081  0.0078      No

                                                         -0.1019  -0.0858     Yes

              [Big Five Personality Traits: Agent Architecture Comparison (ANOVA)]

Source        Sum of Squares (SS)         df          F           p-value
Group         15.298                      2           39.46       < .001
Residual      611.110                     3153        N/A         N/A

Group 1       Group 2    Mean Difference     p-value     Lower Bound Upper Bound Reject Null
Demographics  Interview  0.1705              < .001
Demographics  Persona    0.0843              < .001      0.1255   0.2155      Yes
Interview     Persona    -0.0862             < .001
                                                         0.0393   0.1293      Yes

                                                         -0.1312  -0.0412     Yes

              [Economic Games: Agent Architecture Comparison (ANOVA)]

Source        Sum of Squares (SS)         df          F           p-value
Group         1.812                                               0.120
Residual      1344.295                    2           2.12        N/A

                                          3153        N/A

Group 1       Group 2    Mean Difference     p-value     Lower Bound Upper Bound Reject Null
Demographics  Interview  0.0585              0.0996
Demographics  Persona    0.0333              0.4704      -0.0083  0.1253      No
Interview     Persona    -0.0252             0.6508
                                                         -0.0334  0.1001      No

                                                         -0.0919  0.0416      No

Table 2. Comparative predictive performance of agents built using different descriptions. Agents constructed from
interview transcripts outperformed both demographic-based and persona-based agents across multiple tasks.
Specifically, interview-based agents showed significant improvement in predicting responses to the General Social
Survey (in accuracy) and Big Five Personality Traits (in correlation), as confirmed by ANOVA tests (p < 0.001 for
both). In contrast, no significant differences were observed between agent types for the Economic Games (in
correlation), indicating that interviews were particularly valuable for tasks requiring deeper, personal insights.

                                                                                                                   39
[General Social Survey: Construct-Level Analysis]

General Social Survey     Accuracy  Normalized  Correlation  Normalized
                                     accuracy                Correlation
              natspac/y       0.33                    0.17
              natenvir/y       0.6        0.45        0.51         0.25
               natheal/y       0.7        0.74        0.36         0.69
               natcity/y      0.48        0.91        0.32         0.73
              natdrug/y       0.56        0.75        0.29         0.62
              nateduc/y       0.68        0.78        0.36          0.5
               natrace/y      0.64        0.84        0.67         0.54
              natarms/y       0.56        0.84        0.46         0.87
               nataid/y        0.7        0.75        0.34         0.63
               natfare/y      0.67        0.85         0.5         0.53
                              0.44        0.84        0.14         0.71
               natroad        0.56        0.61        0.21         0.24
                natsoc        0.52        0.72        0.37         0.36
               natmass        0.54        0.71        0.22         0.62
               natpark        0.58        0.75        0.43         0.43
                natchld       0.48        0.78        0.32         0.69
                 natsci       0.54        0.69        0.43         0.55
               natenrgy       0.51        0.78        0.15          0.7
                uswary        0.75        0.62         0.4         0.24
                prayer        0.56        0.91        0.48          0.7
                 courts       0.43        0.74        0.37          0.7
               discaffw       0.39         0.7        0.33         0.59
               discaffm       0.33        0.67        0.48          0.6
                 fehire       0.48        0.58        0.29         0.71
                 fechld       0.43        0.75        0.29         0.48
               fepresch       0.43        0.64        0.45         0.43
                 fefam        0.78        0.65        0.28         0.62
                 fepol        0.67        0.88         0.6         0.39
                 reg16        0.75        0.85        0.72         0.81
               mobile16       0.89        0.85        0.75         0.86
               famdif16       0.53        0.97        0.53         0.89
               incom16        0.76        0.71        0.59         0.73
             dwelown16        0.86        0.82        0.66         0.67
               paeduc*         0.8        0.96        0.74         0.85
                padeg*        0.91        0.91        0.72         0.87
               maeduc*        0.84        0.98         0.8         0.92
                madeg*        0.97        0.97        0.91         0.96
             mawrkgrw         0.97        1.05        0.96          1.2
                marital       0.98        1.02        0.84         1.03
               widowed        0.94         1.0        0.86         0.95
               divorced       0.84        0.97        0.78         0.92
              martype*        0.95        0.97        0.93         0.94
               posslq/y                   1.02                     1.03

                                                                            40
  wrkstat   0.76  0.94  0.76  0.94
  evwork
wrkgovt1    0.96  1.01  0.66  0.94
wrkgovt2
  partfull  0.88  0.95  0.56  0.74
  wksub1
  wksup1    0.74  0.89  0.3   0.51
 conarmy
  conbus    0.81  0.99  0.69  0.93
 conclerg
 coneduc    0.83  1.05  0.68  1.06
  confed
 confinan   0.83  1.0   0.69  0.95
 conjudge
 conlabor   0.49  0.66  0.28  0.43
 conlegis
conmedic    0.58  0.81  0.34  0.56
 conpress
   consci   0.63  0.83  0.6   0.83
   contv
 vetyears   0.56  0.82  0.28  0.47
  joblose
  jobfind   0.5   0.7   0.23  0.38
   happy
 hapmar     0.52  0.72  0.2   0.31
   satjob
 speduc*    0.54  0.74  0.41  0.59
  spdeg*
 spwrksta   0.54  0.78  0.38  0.64
   spjew
  spfund    0.55  0.75  0.22  0.39
  unemp
  union1    0.6   0.85  0.43  0.67
 spkath/y
   colath   0.62  0.84  0.42  0.64
 spkrac/y
   colrac   0.63  0.83  0.48  0.69
  librac/y
spkcom/y    0.58  0.87  0.33  0.65
 colcom/y
 libcom/y   0.97  0.99  0.91  1.03
spkhomo/y
 colhomo    0.76  0.97  0.59  0.94
libhomo/y
  cappun    0.59  0.84  0.32  0.67
polhitok/y
            0.67  0.92  0.54  0.84

            0.77  0.94  0.5   0.81

            0.67  0.96  0.43  0.83

            0.84  0.98  0.8   0.96

            0.65  0.76  0.37  0.49

            0.74  0.88  0.56  0.78

            0.71  0.88  0.08  0.13

            0.76  0.94  0.42  0.74

            0.74  0.89  0.45  0.68

            0.94  0.99  0.57  0.83

            0.74  0.87  0.23  0.44

            0.64  0.8   0.19  0.4

            0.56  0.71  0.04  0.07

            0.71  0.9   0.17  0.34

            0.54  0.72  0.14  0.29

            0.68  0.8   0.21  0.32

            0.67  0.85  0.2   0.39

            0.75  0.89  0.19  0.34

            0.9   0.98  0.28  0.65

            0.83  0.88  0.21  0.38

            0.85  0.96  0.39  0.67

            0.67  0.77  0.37  0.51

            0.65  0.8   0.14  0.24

                                    41
polabuse/y  0.94  1.0   -0.01  -0.02
polattak/y
            0.67  0.86  0.08   0.16
   grass
  gunlaw    0.73  0.77  0.31   0.36
 owngun
   hunt1    0.7   0.83  0.35   0.56

   class    0.76  0.8   0.37   0.43
   satfin
  finalter  0.89  0.94  0.21   0.3
  finrela
   race*    0.62  0.77  0.61   0.79
  racdif1
  racdif2   0.67  0.97  0.67   0.96
  racdif3
  racdif4   0.63  0.89  0.54   0.83
 wlthwhts
 wlthblks   0.53  0.77  0.71   0.97
 wlthhsps
 racwork    0.93  0.95  0.92   0.95
  letin1a
 getahead   0.81  0.95  0.61   0.86
   aged
  parsol    0.93  1.0   0.08   0.17
  kidssol
 spanking   0.71  0.89  0.42   0.7
  divlaw
 sexeduc    0.75  0.9   0.38   0.63
   pillok
 xmarsex    0.33  0.6   0.14   0.35
 homosex
marhomo     0.15  0.28  0.11   0.29
  discaff
 abdefect   0.31  0.62  0.06   0.15
abnomore
  abhlth    0.62  0.84  0.37   0.61
  abpoor
  abrape    0.49  0.71  0.6    0.75
 absingle
  abany     0.59  0.8   0.31   0.5
  letdie1
 suicide1   0.53  0.75  0.15   0.31
 suicide2
 suicide3   0.36  0.68  0.46   0.71
 suicide4
 pornlaw    0.44  0.79  0.17   0.45
    fair
            0.39  0.53  0.46   0.54

            0.48  0.64  0.34   0.52

            0.78  0.84  0.34   0.47

            0.44  0.67  0.49   0.64

            0.56  0.8   0.22   0.37

            0.68  0.86  0.61   0.74

            0.53  0.69  0.6    0.7

            0.57  0.8   0.47   0.78

            0.83  0.9   0.41   0.58

            0.8   0.9   0.55   0.72

            0.92  0.96  0.27   0.4

            0.83  0.91  0.59   0.74

            0.9   0.95  0.48   0.64

            0.79  0.88  0.54   0.68

            0.79  0.88  0.56   0.71

            0.74  0.82  0.35   0.48

            0.79  0.89  0.4    0.56

            0.75  0.85  0.05   0.07

            0.75  0.85  0.14   0.21

            0.66  0.77  0.22   0.31

            0.7   0.85  0.48   0.68

            0.43  0.63  0.18   0.3

                                      42
 helpful   0.42  0.65  0.24   0.44
   trust
    tax    0.47  0.66  0.24   0.41
  vote16
  pres16   0.58  0.73  0.26   0.46
 if16who
polviews   0.84  0.92  0.76   0.88
 partyid
   news    0.77  0.83  0.72   0.79
  relig*
    jew    0.81  0.89  0.76   0.86
 relig16*
 jew16*    0.55  0.66  0.84   0.88
  attend
   pray    0.74  0.9   0.71   0.89
 postlife
   bible   0.31  0.46  0.37   0.48
 reborn
 savesoul  0.76  0.85  0.63   0.73
 relpersn
sprtprsn   0.72  0.96  0.17   0.36
   born
granborn   0.62  0.7   0.55   0.63
 uscitzn*
 fucitzn   0.75  1.0   0.18   0.44
mnthsusa
  educ*    0.56  0.75  0.75   0.84
 degree*
 income    0.5   0.69  0.75   0.83
 visitors
 rvisitor  0.82  0.9   0.59   0.75
dwelown
  zodiac   0.66  0.75  0.65   0.75
 othlang
   sex*    0.68  0.83  0.48   0.64
 hispanic
  health   0.82  0.9   0.57   0.72
compuse*
webmob     0.63  0.79  0.79   0.91
 xmovie
usewww*    0.56  0.78  0.73   0.9
    life
richwork   0.99  1.0   0.89   1.02

           0.62  0.82  0.43   0.84

           1.0   1.0   1.0    1.27

           0.99  1.0   0.42   1.02

           0.77  0.8   0.85   0.88

           0.94  0.98  0.37   0.76

           0.89  0.98  0.94   0.99

           0.42  0.67  0.34   0.56

           0.86  0.93  0.25   0.61

           0.98  1.0   0.57   1.1

           0.94  1.0   0.92   1.02

           0.9   0.92  0.89   0.92

           0.85  0.92  0.55   0.71

           0.99  1.0   0.97   1.0

           0.98  1.01  0.92   1.03

           0.6   0.75  0.64   0.81

           0.97  1.01  0.12   0.31

           0.98  1.01  0.15   0.62

           0.66  0.75  0.23   0.31

           0.98  1.0   -0.01  -0.05

           0.61  0.78  0.33   0.5

           0.33  0.82  0.34   0.49

                                     43
                   [Big Five: Construct-Level Analysis]

  Big Five         MAE    -  Correlation                          Correlation-
                                                                Replication ratio
   extraversion     0.72  -                              0.45
  agreeableness      0.6                                                  0.51
conscientiousness   0.63  -                              0.35             0.43
   neuroticism      0.75                                                  0.59
                    0.62  -                              0.52             0.77
     openness                                                             0.46
                          -                              0.68

                          -                              0.39

                   [Economic Games: Construct-Level Analysis]

Economic Games     MAE    -  Correlation                        Correlation-

         game1_DG   0.23                                        Replication ratio
        game2_TF1   0.35
        game3_TF2   0.17  -                              0.11   0.24
         game4_PG   0.52
         game5_PD   0.36  -                              0.08   0.16

                          -                              0.03   0.06

                          -                              -0.05  -0.71

                          -                              0.1    0.32

Table 3. The construct-level analysis of predictive accuracy across the General Social Survey, Big Five personality
traits, and economic games. For each construct, we provide accuracy and correlation metrics, along with replication
ratios. The analysis highlights the performance of generative agents in predicting specific dimensions within these
constructs, with metrics showing varied levels of predictive accuracy across different social, personality, and
game-based items. This evaluation complements the individual-level analysis, which is of our primary interest in
this work, by offering a detailed look at the accuracy of agents for specific constructs and items.

                                                                                   44
                             [General Social Survey: Regression]

Age

Variable                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value            p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
const                                         0.6957       0.0039      177.365             0.669
                                                                                           0.019
affiliation_18 - 24                           0.0029       0.0067                 0.427   <0.001
                                                                                          <0.001
affiliation_25 - 34                           -0.0147      0.0063                 -2.343   0.086
                                                                                           0.051
affiliation_35 - 44                           -0.0205      0.0059                 -3.510
                                                                                          p-value
affiliation_45 - 54                           -0.0199      0.0057                 -3.517  <0.001
                                                                                           0.171
affiliation_65 - 74                           0.0108       0.0063                 1.717    0.627
                                                                                           0.008
affiliation_75 or more                        0.0224       0.0115                 1.954    0.130
                                                                                           0.380
Note: R˛ = 0.045, F(6.0, 1045.0) = 8.18, p < 0.001. Reference category: 55 - 64.           0.235
                                                                                           0.662
Census Division                                                                            0.961
                                                                                           0.380
Variable                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value
                                                                                          p-value
const                                         0.6892       0.0043      161.841            <0.001
                                                                                           0.109
affiliation_e. sou. central                   -0.0095      0.0069                 -1.370   0.921
                                                                                          <0.001
affiliation_foreign                           -0.0060      0.0123                 -0.485  <0.001
                                                                                           0.640
affiliation_middle atlantic                   0.0176       0.0067                 2.643   <0.001

affiliation_mountain                          -0.0139      0.0092                 -1.515  p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
affiliation_new england                       0.0073       0.0083                 0.878   <0.001
                                                                                           0.727
affiliation_pacific                           -0.0075      0.0063                 -1.187  <0.001
                                                                                           0.004
affiliation_south atlantic                    0.0032       0.0072                 0.438
                                                                                                    45
affiliation_w. nor. central                   0.0004       0.0078                 0.049

affiliation_w. sou. central                   -0.0067      0.0076                 -0.878

Note: R˛ = 0.022, F(9.0, 1042.0) = 2.55, p < 0.001. Reference category: e. nor. central.

Political Ideology

Variable                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value

const                                         0.6703       0.0031      218.263

affiliation_conservative                      -0.0081      0.0051                 -1.605

affiliation_extremely conservative            -0.0007      0.0075                 -0.099

affiliation_extremely liberal                 0.0704       0.0058                 12.181

affiliation_liberal                           0.0497       0.0049                 10.208

affiliation_slightly conservative             -0.0030      0.0063                 -0.468

affiliation_slightly liberal                  0.0269       0.0062                 4.336

Note: R˛ = 0.215, F(6.0, 1045.0) = 47.70, p < 0.001. Reference category: moderate.

           Political Party                    Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value
                                                0.7165       0.0037    196.221
                      Variable                  -0.0397      0.0057     -7.006
                        const                   0.0022       0.0062     0.349
                                                -0.0516      0.0069     -7.459
      affiliation_independent (neither)         -0.0171      0.0059     -2.884
affiliation_independent, close to democrat
affiliation_independent, close to republican

    affiliation_not very strong democrat
affiliation_not very strong republican           -0.0508      0.0062             -8.178    <0.001
                                                                                           <0.001
affiliation_other party                          -0.0408      0.0117             -3.494    <0.001

affiliation_strong republican                    -0.0577      0.0058            -10.024    p-value
                                                                                           <0.001
Note: R˛ = 0.155, F(7.0, 1044.0) = 27.28, p < 0.001. Reference category: strong democrat.   0.655
                                                                                            0.002
Education                                                                                  <0.001
                                                                                            0.005
Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error        t-value
                                                                                           p-value
const                                            0.6828       0.0029            233.029    <0.001
                                                                                           <0.001
affiliation_associate/junior college             -0.0024      0.0053             -0.448     0.281

affiliation_bachelor's                           0.0140       0.0046             3.063     p-value
                                                                                           <0.001
affiliation_graduate                             0.0225       0.0056             3.985      0.628
                                                                                            0.752
affiliation_less than high school                -0.0354      0.0124             -2.844    <0.001
                                                                                            0.119
Note: R˛ = 0.034, F(4.0, 1047.0) = 9.11, p < 0.001. Reference category: high school.        0.218

Race                                                                                       p-value
                                                                                           <0.001
Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error        t-value     0.153

const                                            0.6922       0.0021            327.316    p-value
                                                                                           <0.001
affiliation_black                                -0.0208      0.0053             -3.917     0.792
                                                                                            0.825
affiliation_other                                -0.0067      0.0063             -1.078     0.009
                                                                                            0.533
Note: R˛ = 0.015, F(2.0, 1049.0) = 7.83, p < 0.001. Reference category: white.              0.072

Ethnicity                                                                                            46

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error        t-value

const                                            0.6926       0.0021            334.816

affiliation_American Indian or Alaskan native    -0.0055      0.0113             -0.484

affiliation_Asian                                -0.0027      0.0085             -0.317

affiliation_Black/African American               -0.0183      0.0052             -3.492

affiliation_Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  -0.0417      0.0268             -1.558

affiliation_Other race or ethnicity              -0.0103      0.0084             -1.232

Note: R˛ = 0.013, F(5.0, 1122.0) = 3.02, p < 0.001. Reference category: White/Caucasian.

Gender

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error        t-value

const                                            0.6909       0.0025            279.783

affiliation_male                                 -0.0054      0.0037             -1.432

Note: R˛ = 0.002, F(1.0, 1050.0) = 2.05, p < 0.001. Reference category: female.

          Income                                 Coefficient  Std. Error        t-value
                                                   0.6837       0.0046          149.055
              Variable                             -0.0023      0.0086           -0.263
                 const                             -0.0023      0.0103           -0.221
                                                   0.0389       0.0148           2.631
affiliation_$100,000 to $124,999                   -0.0106      0.0170           -0.623
affiliation_$125,000 to $149,999                   0.0329       0.0183           1.800
affiliation_$150,000 to $174,999
affiliation_$175,000 to $199,999
affiliation_$200,000 to $249,999
affiliation_$25,000 to $34,999        -0.0067      0.0076                         -0.889         0.374
                                                                                                 0.799
affiliation_$250,000 or more          0.0038       0.0148                         0.255          0.130
                                                                                                 0.585
affiliation_$35,000 to $49,999        0.0109       0.0072                         1.515          0.694

affiliation_$75,000 to $99,999        0.0039       0.0071                         0.547         p-value
                                                                                                <0.001
affiliation_Less than $25,000         -0.0026      0.0066                         -0.394         0.024
                                                                                                 0.113
Note: R˛ = 0.019, F(10.0, 861.0) = 1.70, p < 0.001. Reference category: $50,000 to $74,999.
                                                                                                p-value
Neighborhood                                                                                    <0.001
                                                                                                <0.001
Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value                          <0.001
                                                                                                 0.001
const                                 0.6908       0.0030      230.902                           0.048
                                                                                                <0.001
affiliation_Rural                     -0.0122      0.0054                         -2.255

affiliation_Urban                     -0.0076      0.0048                         -1.586

Note: R˛ = 0.007, F(2.0, 869.0) = 2.91, p < 0.001. Reference category: Suburban.

Sexual Orientation

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value

const                                 0.6783       0.0022      305.815

affiliation_Asexual                   0.0708       0.0155                         4.574

affiliation_Bisexual                  0.0328       0.0074                         4.415

affiliation_Gay or lesbian            0.0316       0.0099                         3.199

affiliation_Other sexual orientation  0.0375       0.0189                         1.984

affiliation_Pansexual                 0.0596       0.0131                         4.539

Note: R˛ = 0.071, F(5.0, 864.0) = 13.25, p < 0.001. Reference category: Heterosexual/straight.

                                      [Big Five: Regression]

Age

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error                     t-value       p-value
                                                                                                <0.001
const                                 0.6712       0.0178                         37.639         0.343
                                                                                                 0.557
affiliation_18 - 24                   0.0291       0.0306                         0.949          0.858
                                                                                                 0.906
affiliation_25 - 34                   0.0167       0.0285                         0.588          0.072
                                                                                                 0.049
affiliation_35 - 44                   -0.0047      0.0266                         -0.178
                                                                                                p-value
affiliation_45 - 54                   -0.0030      0.0258                         -0.118        <0.001
                                                                                                 0.059
affiliation_65 - 74                   -0.0516      0.0287                         -1.798         0.863
                                                                                                 0.488
affiliation_75 or more                -0.1028      0.0521                         -1.973
                                                                                                          47
Note: R˛ = 0.011, F(6.0, 1045.0) = 1.87, p < 0.001. Reference category: 55 - 64.

  Census Division                     Coefficient  Std. Error                     t-value
                                        0.6520       0.0191                       34.093
           Variable                     0.0585       0.0310                        1.888
             const                      -0.0095      0.0551                       -0.172
                                        -0.0208      0.0300                       -0.694
affiliation_e. sou. central
     affiliation_foreign

affiliation_middle atlantic
affiliation_mountain                          0.0361       0.0412      0.877               0.381
                                                                                           0.627
affiliation_new england                       -0.0181      0.0374      -0.486              0.452
                                                                                           0.333
affiliation_pacific                           0.0213       0.0283      0.753               0.133
                                                                                           0.540
affiliation_south atlantic                    0.0313       0.0323      0.968
                                                                                          p-value
affiliation_w. nor. central                   0.0524       0.0348      1.503              <0.001
                                                                                           0.790
affiliation_w. sou. central                   -0.0209      0.0340      -0.613              0.689
                                                                                           0.408
Note: R˛ = 0.011, F(9.0, 1042.0) = 1.28, p < 0.001. Reference category: e. nor. central.   0.076
                                                                                           0.897
Political Ideology                                                                         0.246

Variable                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value            p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
const                                         0.6805       0.0154      44.052              0.183
                                                                                           0.120
affiliation_conservative                      -0.0068      0.0254      -0.267              0.753
                                                                                           0.187
affiliation_extremely conservative            0.0151       0.0377      0.400               0.736
                                                                                           0.215
affiliation_extremely liberal                 -0.0241      0.0291      -0.828              0.424

affiliation_liberal                           -0.0436      0.0245      -1.779             p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
affiliation_slightly conservative             -0.0041      0.0317      -0.130              0.034
                                                                                           0.088
affiliation_slightly liberal                  -0.0363      0.0312      -1.162              0.102
                                                                                          <0.001
Note: R˛ = 0.005, F(6.0, 1045.0) = 0.84, p < 0.001. Reference category: moderate.
                                                                                          p-value
Political Party                                                                           <0.001
                                                                                           0.005
Variable                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value             0.740

const                                         0.6656       0.0176      37.744                       48

affiliation_independent (neither)             0.0365       0.0274      1.333

affiliation_independent, close to democrat    -0.0464      0.0298      -1.558

affiliation_independent, close to republican  0.0105       0.0334      0.315

affiliation_not very strong democrat          -0.0379      0.0287      -1.321

affiliation_not very strong republican        -0.0101      0.0300      -0.338

affiliation_other party                       0.0701       0.0564      1.242

affiliation_strong republican                 0.0222       0.0278      0.799

Note: R˛ = 0.012, F(7.0, 1044.0) = 1.81, p < 0.001. Reference category: strong democrat.

Education

Variable                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value

const                                         0.6368       0.0132      48.170

affiliation_associate/junior college          0.0504       0.0237      2.127

affiliation_bachelor's                        0.0353       0.0207      1.708

affiliation_graduate                          0.0416       0.0255      1.635

affiliation_less than high school             0.1890       0.0562      3.366

Note: R˛ = 0.014, F(4.0, 1047.0) = 3.77, p < 0.001. Reference category: high school.

    Race                                      Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value
                                                0.6742       0.0095    71.125
     Variable                                   -0.0676      0.0238    -2.834
       const                                    0.0093       0.0280     0.332

affiliation_black
affiliation_other
Note: R˛ = 0.008, F(2.0, 1049.0) = 4.27, p < 0.001. Reference category: white.

Ethnicity

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value     p-value
                                                                                             <0.001
const                                            0.6740       0.0093             72.481       0.151
                                                                                              0.724
affiliation_American Indian or Alaskan native    0.0728       0.0507             1.436        0.006
                                                                                              0.231
affiliation_Asian                                -0.0134      0.0380             -0.353       0.219

affiliation_Black/African American               -0.0650      0.0235             -2.761      p-value
                                                                                             <0.001
affiliation_Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  0.1443       0.1204             1.199        0.024

affiliation_Other race or ethnicity              0.0464       0.0377             1.230       p-value
                                                                                             <0.001
Note: R˛ = 0.012, F(5.0, 1122.0) = 2.80, p < 0.001. Reference category: White/Caucasian.      0.658
                                                                                              0.205
Gender                                                                                        0.423
                                                                                              0.826
Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value      0.333
                                                                                              0.591
const                                            0.6490       0.0110             58.917       0.442
                                                                                              0.123
affiliation_male                                 0.0377       0.0167             2.264        0.070
                                                                                              0.476
Note: R˛ = 0.005, F(1.0, 1050.0) = 5.12, p < 0.001. Reference category: female.
                                                                                             p-value
Income                                                                                       <0.001
                                                                                              0.256
Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value      0.442

const                                            0.6991       0.0204             34.276      p-value
                                                                                             <0.001
affiliation_$100,000 to $124,999                 0.0170       0.0384             0.443        0.484

affiliation_$125,000 to $149,999                 -0.0581      0.0458             -1.268                49

affiliation_$150,000 to $174,999                 -0.0526      0.0657             -0.801

affiliation_$175,000 to $199,999                 -0.0166      0.0755             -0.220

affiliation_$200,000 to $249,999                 0.0787       0.0812             0.970

affiliation_$25,000 to $34,999                   -0.0181      0.0337             -0.537

affiliation_$250,000 or more                     -0.0505      0.0657             -0.769

affiliation_$35,000 to $49,999                   -0.0496      0.0321             -1.546

affiliation_$75,000 to $99,999                   -0.0571      0.0315             -1.812

affiliation_Less than $25,000                    -0.0210      0.0295             -0.714

Note: R˛ = 0.010, F(10.0, 861.0) = 0.88, p < 0.001. Reference category: $50,000 to $74,999.

Neighborhood

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value

const                                            0.6619       0.0132             49.984

affiliation_Rural                                0.0273       0.0240             1.137

affiliation_Urban                                0.0163       0.0212             0.770

Note: R˛ = 0.002, F(2.0, 869.0) = 0.73, p < 0.001. Reference category: Suburban.

Sexual Orientation                               Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value
                                                   0.6798       0.0102           66.621
          Variable                                 -0.0499      0.0712           -0.700
             const

    affiliation_Asexual
affiliation_Bisexual                  -0.0359      0.0342                         -1.050       0.294
                                                                                               0.742
affiliation_Gay or lesbian            0.0150       0.0455                         0.329        0.327
                                                                                               0.319
affiliation_Other sexual orientation  -0.0853      0.0869                         -0.981

affiliation_Pansexual                 -0.0603      0.0605                         -0.997

Note: R˛ = 0.004, F(5.0, 864.0) = 0.69, p < 0.001. Reference category: Heterosexual/straight.

                                   [Economic Games: Regression]

Age

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error                     t-value      p-value
                                                                                               <0.001
const                                 0.2859       0.0593                         4.822         0.994
                                                                                                0.932
affiliation_18 - 24                   -0.0007      0.1017                         -0.007        0.194
                                                                                                0.295
affiliation_25 - 34                   -0.0081      0.0945                         -0.085        0.913
                                                                                                0.774
affiliation_35 - 44                   0.1149       0.0884                         1.300
                                                                                               p-value
affiliation_45 - 54                   0.0898       0.0857                         1.049        <0.001
                                                                                                0.126
affiliation_65 - 74                   0.0104       0.0955                         0.109         0.713
                                                                                                0.950
affiliation_75 or more                0.0504       0.1755                         0.287         0.966
                                                                                                0.979
Note: R˛ = 0.003, F(6.0, 1041.0) = 0.54, p < 0.001. Reference category: 55 - 64.                0.290
                                                                                                0.794
Census Division                                                                                 0.992
                                                                                                0.908
Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error                     t-value
                                                                                               p-value
const                                 0.2977       0.0636                         4.683        <0.001
                                                                                                0.526
affiliation_e. sou. central           0.1580       0.1032                         1.531         0.024
                                                                                                0.339
affiliation_foreign                   -0.0672      0.1827                         -0.368        0.228
                                                                                                0.403
affiliation_middle atlantic           -0.0062      0.0998                         -0.062        0.334

affiliation_mountain                  0.0058       0.1368                         0.042                  50

affiliation_new england               0.0033       0.1239                         0.026

affiliation_pacific                   0.0994       0.0939                         1.059

affiliation_south atlantic            -0.0280      0.1073                         -0.261

affiliation_w. nor. central           -0.0012      0.1156                         -0.010

affiliation_w. sou. central           -0.0131      0.1133                         -0.116

Note: R˛ = 0.005, F(9.0, 1038.0) = 0.57, p < 0.001. Reference category: e. nor. central.

Political Ideology

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error                     t-value

const                                 0.3642       0.0509                         7.153

affiliation_conservative              -0.0534      0.0840                         -0.635

affiliation_extremely conservative    0.2830       0.1252                         2.259

affiliation_extremely liberal         -0.0917      0.0959                         -0.956

affiliation_liberal                   -0.0976      0.0810                         -1.205

affiliation_slightly conservative     -0.0875      0.1046                         -0.836

affiliation_slightly liberal          -0.0995      0.1030                         -0.966

Note: R˛ = 0.010, F(6.0, 1041.0) = 1.76, p < 0.001. Reference category: moderate.
Political Party

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value  p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
const                                            0.2616       0.0587             4.456     0.056
                                                                                           0.728
affiliation_independent (neither)                0.1738       0.0909             1.913     0.847
                                                                                           0.903
affiliation_independent, close to democrat       0.0344       0.0988             0.348     0.838
                                                                                           0.703
affiliation_independent, close to republican     0.0215       0.1110             0.193     0.065

affiliation_not very strong democrat             0.0117       0.0953             0.123    p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
affiliation_not very strong republican           0.0204       0.0996             0.205     0.232
                                                                                           0.081
affiliation_other party                          0.0712       0.1871             0.381     0.215
                                                                                           0.733
affiliation_strong republican                    0.1708       0.0926             1.846
                                                                                          p-value
Note: R˛ = 0.007, F(7.0, 1040.0) = 1.01, p < 0.001. Reference category: strong democrat.  <0.001
                                                                                           0.652
Education                                                                                  0.514

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value  p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
const                                            0.3909       0.0440             8.887     0.712
                                                                                           0.456
affiliation_associate/junior college             -0.0941      0.0787             -1.195    0.651
                                                                                           0.897
affiliation_bachelor's                           -0.1202      0.0688             -1.748    0.687

affiliation_graduate                             -0.1055      0.0850             -1.241   p-value
                                                                                          <0.001
affiliation_less than high school                -0.0636      0.1866             -0.341    0.790

Note: R˛ = 0.004, F(4.0, 1043.0) = 0.95, p < 0.001. Reference category: high school.                51

Race

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value

const                                            0.3365       0.0315             10.686

affiliation_black                                -0.0358      0.0793             -0.452

affiliation_other                                -0.0610      0.0935             -0.653

Note: R˛ = 0.001, F(2.0, 1045.0) = 0.28, p < 0.001. Reference category: white.

Ethnicity

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value

const                                            0.3335       0.0298             11.173

affiliation_American Indian or Alaskan native    -0.0601      0.1625             -0.370

affiliation_Asian                                -0.0909      0.1219             -0.746

affiliation_Black/African American               -0.0342      0.0757             -0.452

affiliation_Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  -0.0499      0.3859             -0.129

affiliation_Other race or ethnicity              -0.0491      0.1219             -0.403

Note: R˛ = 0.001, F(5.0, 1118.0) = 0.18, p < 0.001. Reference category: White/Caucasian.

Gender

Variable                                         Coefficient  Std. Error         t-value

const                                            0.3190       0.0365             8.742

affiliation_male                                 0.0148       0.0554             0.266

Note: R˛ = 0.000, F(1.0, 1046.0) = 0.07, p < 0.001. Reference category: female.
Income

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value                         p-value
                                                                                               <0.001
const                                 0.2884       0.0731      3.947                            0.883
                                                                                                0.901
affiliation_$100,000 to $124,999      -0.0201      0.1373      -0.147                           0.696
                                                                                                0.726
affiliation_$125,000 to $149,999      -0.0204      0.1638      -0.125                           0.970
                                                                                                0.890
affiliation_$150,000 to $174,999      -0.0917      0.2347      -0.391                           0.910
                                                                                                0.826
affiliation_$175,000 to $199,999      -0.0945      0.2699      -0.350                           0.903
                                                                                                0.018
affiliation_$200,000 to $249,999      0.0108       0.2900      0.037
                                                                                               p-value
affiliation_$25,000 to $34,999        0.0166       0.1205      0.138                           <0.001
                                                                                                0.433
affiliation_$250,000 or more          0.0266       0.2347      0.113                            0.693

affiliation_$35,000 to $49,999        0.0252       0.1147      0.220                           p-value
                                                                                               <0.001
affiliation_$75,000 to $99,999        -0.0138      0.1128      -0.122                           0.802
                                                                                                0.787
affiliation_Less than $25,000         0.2508       0.1054      2.381                            0.727
                                                                                                0.809
Note: R˛ = 0.011, F(10.0, 860.0) = 0.95, p < 0.001. Reference category: $50,000 to $74,999.     0.689

Neighborhood

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value

const                                 0.3270       0.0475      6.884

affiliation_Rural                     0.0676       0.0862      0.785

affiliation_Urban                     -0.0300      0.0760      -0.394

Note: R˛ = 0.001, F(2.0, 868.0) = 0.56, p < 0.001. Reference category: Suburban.

Sexual Orientation

Variable                              Coefficient  Std. Error  t-value

const                                 0.3417       0.0365      9.366

affiliation_Asexual                   -0.0639      0.2545      -0.251

affiliation_Bisexual                  -0.0330      0.1222      -0.270

affiliation_Gay or lesbian            -0.0567      0.1624      -0.349

affiliation_Other sexual orientation  -0.0750      0.3107      -0.241

affiliation_Pansexual                 -0.0866      0.2160      -0.401

Note: R˛ = 0.000, F(5.0, 863.0) = 0.08, p < 0.001. Reference category: Heterosexual/straight.

Table 4. Regression analyses of predictive performance across demographic variables. This table presents the results
of regression analyses examining the influence of demographic variables on the predictive performance of
generative agents, across the General Social Survey, Big Five Personality Traits, and economic games. Separate
models were run for each demographic factor, with predictive performance as the dependent variable. Coefficients
represent the relative difference in performance for each demographic group, with positive values indicating higher
predictive accuracy. Significant discrepancies are observed for political ideology, party affiliation, and sexual
orientation, with stronger performance for participants identifying as strong liberals, strong Democrats, and
non-heterosexual/straight individuals.

                                                                                                        52
53
                                                           [General Social Survey: Demographic Parity Difference]

                      Agents w/ Interview                     Agents w/ Demog. Info.                 Agents w/ Persona Desc.                Agents w/ Survey Info Agents w/ Survey + Interview

        Age                      DPD=4.48                                    DPD=6.44                                DPD=3.43                            DPD=3.12                                DPD=5.44
Census Division           Min: 35 - 44 (64.23%)                       Min: 45 - 54 (54.42%)                   Min: 45 - 54 (55.30%)               Min: 45 - 54 (63.79%)                   Min: 25 - 34 (66.82%)
Political Ideology     Max: 75 or more (68.71%)                     Max: 75 or more (60.87%)                  Max: 18 - 24 (58.73%)            Max: 75 or more (66.91%)                 Max: 75 or more (72.27%)

                                 DPD=2.82                                    DPD=2.19                                DPD=3.81                            DPD=3.83                                DPD=4.14
                        Min: mountain (64.58%)                    Min: e. sou. central (55.50%)              Min: mountain (54.28%)             Min: mountain (63.05%)                   Min: mountain (66.09%)
                     Max: middle atlantic (67.40%)               Max: middle atlantic (57.68%)           Max: middle atlantic (58.10%)       Max: middle atlantic (66.88%)           Max: middle atlantic (70.22%)

                                 DPD=8.60                                   DPD=13.75                                DPD=13.00                           DPD=6.22                                DPD=7.09
                      Min: conservative (62.69%)                   Min: conservative (49.19%)        Min: extremely conservative (49.17%)     Min: extremely conservative        Min: extremely conservative (66.09%)
                    Max: extremely liberal (71.29%)             Max: extremely liberal (62.94%)
                                                                                                        Max: extremely liberal (62.17%)                   (62.68%)                  Max: extremely liberal (73.18%)
                                                                             DPD=11.26                                                      Max: extremely liberal (68.90%)
                                                                Min: strong republican (50.43%)
Political Party                      DPD=6.98                Max: independent, close to democrat                    DPD=10.27                           DPD=5.16                              DPD=5.38
  Education             Min: strong republican (62.12%)                                                Min: strong republican (50.84%)         Min: other party (62.37%)         Min: strong republican (65.53%)
      Race           Max: independent, close to democrat                      (61.69%)               Max: independent, close to democrat    Max: strong democrat (67.53%)        Max: strong democrat (70.91%)
   Ethnicity
                                      (69.10%)                               DPD=5.09                                (61.11%)
                                                              Min: less than high school (53.14%)
                                     DPD=5.32                                                                        DPD=6.30                              DPD=4.63                              DPD=4.25
                      Min: less than high school (62.00%)            Max: graduate (58.23%)           Min: less than high school (52.31%)   Min: less than high school (61.69%)   Min: less than high school (65.50%)

                             Max: graduate (67.32%)                          DPD=3.39                        Max: graduate (58.61%)                Max: graduate (66.32%)                Max: graduate (69.75%)
                                                                       Min: black (53.40%)
                                     DPD=2.22                          Max: white (56.79%)                           DPD=3.04                              DPD=1.95                              DPD=2.49
                               Min: black (63.81%)                                                             Min: black (53.63%)                   Min: black (63.40%)                   Min: black (66.27%)
                               Max: white (66.03%)                           DPD=3.81                          Max: white (56.67%)                   Max: white (65.35%)                   Max: white (68.77%
                                                             Min: Other race or ethnicity (53.19%)
                                     DPD=2.26              Max: Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander                  DPD=3.63                              DPD=2.59                              DPD=2.84
                    Min: Black/African American (63.83%)                                             Min: Other race or ethnicity (53.13%)       Min: Other race or ethnicity    Min: Other race or ethnicity (65.94%)
                                                                              (57.00%)
                        Max: White/Caucasian (66.09%)                                                   Max: White/Caucasian (56.76%)                       (62.78%)                Max: White/Caucasian (68.78%)
                                                                             DPD=0.86                                                         Max: White/Caucasian (65.37%)
                                                                       Min: male (55.79%)
    Gender                          DPD=0.71                          Max: female (56.66%)                  DPD=1.01                              DPD=0.15                                       DPD=0.63
    Income                    Min: male (65.27%)                                                      Min: male (55.64%)                    Min: female (64.91%)                           Min: male (67.94%)
                             Max: female (65.98%)                            DPD=6.43                Max: female (56.65%)                   Max: male (65.06%)                            Max: female (68.57%)
Neighborhood                                                    Min: $250,000 or more (54.07%)
    Sexual                          DPD=4.47                 Max: $200,000 to $249,999 (60.50%)                      DPD=7.12                               DPD=6.40                             DPD=6.40
                    Min: $175,000 to $199,999 (64.48%)                                                 Min: Less than $25,000 (54.27%)      Min: $175,000 to $199,999 (61.43%)   Min: $175,000 to $199,999 (64.43%)
 Orientation        Max: $150,000 to $174,999 (68.95%)                       DPD=1.81                Max: $200,000 to $249,999 (61.39%)     Max: $200,000 to $249,999 (67.83%)   Max: $200,000 to $249,999 (70.83%)
                                                                       Min: Rural (55.06%)
                                    DPD=1.14                        Max: Suburban (56.88%)                          DPD=3.00                               DPD=1.11                             DPD=1.40
                              Min: Rural (64.74%)                                                             Min: Rural (53.92%)                    Min: Rural (64.02%)                  Min: Rural (67.23%)
                           Max: Suburban (65.87%)                            DPD=8.27                      Max: Suburban (56.92%)                 Max: Suburban (65.12%)               Max: Suburban (68.63%)
                                                             Min: Heterosexual/straight (54.97%)
                                    DPD=7.44                                                                        DPD=9.68                               DPD=5.39                             DPD=6.50
                    Min: Heterosexual/straight (64.56%)             Max: Pansexual (63.24%)          Min: Heterosexual/straight (55.03%)    Min: Heterosexual/straight (63.94%)  Min: Heterosexual/straight (67.06%)

                            Max: Asexual (72.00%)                                                           Max: Asexual (64.71%)                 Max: Pansexual (69.33%)               Max: Asexual (73.56%)

                                                                                                                                                                                 54
                                                                [Big Five: Demographic Parity Difference]

                    Agents w/ Interview                         Agents w/ Demog. Info.                Agents w/ Persona Desc.              Agents w/ Survey Info Agents w/ Survey + Interview

Age                 DPD=0.22                                         DPD=0.37                                       DPD=0.33                      DPD=0.3                                DPD=0.24
                                                                Min: 18 - 24 (0.23)                            Min: 18 - 24 (0.37)           Min: 18- 24 (0.31)                     Min: 18 - 24 (0.52)
                    Min: 18 - 24 (0.56)                         Max: 65 - 74 (0.6)                             Max: 65 - 74 (0.7)          Max: 75 or more (0.61                  Max: 75 or more (0.76)

                    Max: 75 or more (0.78)                                                                          DPD=0.23
                                                                                                             Min: mountain (0.39)
Census Division              DPD=0.19                                 DPD=0.24                                Max: foreign (0.63)                  DPD=0.15                               DPD=0.2
                       Min: mountain (0.49)                     Min: mountain (0.36)                                                        Min: mountain (0.45)                    Min: mountain (0.5)
                    Max: w. sou. central (0.68)                                                                     DPD=0.14               Max: new england (0.6)                 Max: new england (0.7)
                                                                 Max: foreign (0.6)                      Min: extremely liberal (0.49)
                                                                                                      Max: slightly conservative (0.63)
Political Ideology                 DPD=0.06                                DPD=0.17                                                                  DPD=0.18                               DPD=0.05
                             Min: moderate (0.6)                Min: extremely liberal (0.34)                       DPD=0.22               Min: extremely liberal (0.4)           Min: extremely liberal (0.6)
                    Max: extremely conservative (0.67)                                                       Min: other party (0.39)
                                                                    Max: moderate (0.51)                Max: strong republican (0.61)       Max: conservative (0.58)               Max: conservative (0.64)

Political Party                        DPD=0.17                                DPD=0.22                                                                     DPD=0.3                          DPD=0.23
                                Min: other party (0.49)                  Min: other party (0.3)                                                     Min: other party (0.3)            Min: other party (0.42)
                    Max: independent, close to democrat (0.66)  Max: independent, close to democrat                                        Max: not very strong republican (0.6)  Max: strong republican (0.65)

                                                                                  (0.53)

Education                        DPD=0.23                                   DPD=0.24                                 DPD=0.3                               DPD=0.08                                 DPD=0.17
                    Min: less than high school (0.44)           Min: less than high school (0.3)       Min: less than high school (0.33)     Min: less than high school (0.47)         Min: less than high school (0.49)

                           Max: graduate (0.68)                       Max: graduate (0.54)                    Max: graduate (0.63)                  Max: graduate (0.55)                      Max: graduate (0.65)

Race                   DPD=0.11                                     DPD=0.17                                        DPD=0.08                               DPD=0.09                                 DPD=0.08
                    Min: other (0.59)                            Min: other (0.4)                               Min: other (0.52)                      Min: white (0.5)                         Min: white (0.61)
                    Max: black (0.7)                            Max: black (0.57)                                Max: black (0.6)                     Max: black (0.58)                         Max: black (0.69)

Ethnicity                             DPD=0.21                                  DPD=0.62                            DPD=0.42                               DPD=0.21                                 DPD=0.26
                    Min: Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander      Min: Native Hawaiian or Pacific      Min: Native Hawaiian or Pacific       Min: Native Hawaiian or Pacific      Min: Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

                                         (0.49)                              Islander (-0.05)                     Islander (0.31)                       Islander (0.38)                                (0.43)
                      Max: Black/African American (0.71)        Max: Black/African American (0.57)    Max: American Indian or Alaskan      Max: Black/African American (0.59)       Max: Black/African American (0.69)

    Gender                         DPD=0.01                                    DPD=0.01                            native (0.73)                           DPD=0.02                                  DPD=0.0
                               Min: male (0.62)                           Min: female (0.46)                                                          Min: female (0.5)                         Min: male (0.62)
    Income                    Max: female (0.63)                           Max: male (0.46)                         DPD=0.02                          Max: male (0.53)                         Max: female (0.62)
                                                                                                               Min: female (0.54)
Neighborhood                       DPD=0.32                                    DPD=0.29                         Max: male (0.55)                           DPD=0.33                                 DPD=0.36
                     Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.41)            Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.31)                                           Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.31)          Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.39)
    Sexual                                                                                                          DPD=0.38                Max: $125,000 to $149,999 (0.64)
 Orientation           Max: $250,000 or more (0.73)                 Max: $250,000 or more (0.6)       Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.35)                                                  Max: $250,000 or more (0.75)
                                                                                                      Max: $150,000 to $174,999 (0.73)                     DPD=0.04
                                   DPD=0.03                                    DPD=0.05                                                             Min: Suburban (0.48)                            DPD=0.02
                              Min: Urban (0.58)                            Min: Rural (0.43)                        DPD=0.04                                                                   Min: Urban (0.58)
                               Max: Rural (0.62)                          Max: Urban (0.48)                   Min: Suburban (0.51)                    Max: Urban (0.52)                         Max: Rural (0.61)

                                   DPD=0.23                                    DPD=0.29                        Max: Urban (0.54)                           DPD=0.27                                 DPD=0.29
                    Min: Other sexual orientation (0.43)        Min: Other sexual orientation (0.17)                                                 Min: Asexual (0.24)             Min: Other sexual orientation (0.39)
                                                                 Max: Heterosexual/straight (0.46)                  DPD=0.45                Max: Heterosexual/straight (0.52)
                            Max: Pansexual (0.66)                                                     Min: Other sexual orientation (0.1)                                                    Max: Pansexual (0.68)
                                                                                                      Max: Heterosexual/straight (0.55)

                                                                                                                                                                                  55
                                                            [Economic Games: Demographic Parity Difference]

       Age          Agents w/ Interview                      Agents w/ Demog. Info.                   Agents w/ Persona Desc.                 Agents w/ Survey Info                   Agents w/ Survey + Interview

Census Division                DPD=0.18                                    DPD=0.19                                 DPD=0.17                               DPD=0.09                                     DPD=0.13
                        Min: 75 or more (0.21)                        Min: 35 - 44 (0.18)                      Min: 18 -24 (0.21)                   Min: 75 or more (0.23)                        Min: 75 or more (0.2)
     Political                                                        Max: 55 - 64 (0.36)                      Max: 45 - 54 (0.37)                                                                 Max: 25 - 34 (0.34)
    Ideology              Max: 45 - 54 (0.39)                                                                                                         Max: 45 - 54 (0.32)
 Political Party                                                           DPD=0.21                                 DPD=0.21                                                                            DPD=0.22
                                DPD=0.2                           Min: e. nor. central (0.19)                Min: mountain (0.21)                          DPD=0.23                            Min: e. nor. central (0.16)
                         Min: mountain (0.25)                      Max: new england (0.4)                      Max: pacific (0.42)                   Min: mountain (0.12)
                          Max: foreign (0.45)                                                                                                      Max: new england (0.35)                         Max: pacific (0.38)
                                                                            DPD=0.5                                 DPD=0.17
                               DPD=0.19                     Min: extremely conservative (-0.03)              Min: moderate (0.23)                          DPD=0.22                                     DPD=0.21
                       Min: conservative (0.24)                                                           Max: slightly liberal (0.41)         Min: slightly conservative (0.2)                 Min: conservative (0.18)
                    Max: extremely liberal (0.44)               Max: extremely liberal (0.47)                                                   Max: extremely liberal (0.42)                  Max: slightly liberal (0.39)
                                                                                                                    DPD=0.23
                               DPD=0.22                                     DPD=0.4                          Min: other party (0.12)                       DPD=0.23                                     DPD=0.29
                  Min: independent (neither) (0.21)             Min: strong republican (0.03)            Max: strong democrat (0.36)          Min: independent (neither) (0.17)            Min: independent (neither) (0.11)
                                                                Max: strong democrat (0.43)
                    Max: strong democrat (0.43)                                                                                                  Max: strong democrat (0.4)                   Max: strong democrat (0.41)

Education                      DPD=0.14                                    DPD=0.12                          DPD=0.08                                       DPD=0.1                          DPD=0.12
   Race                Min: high school (0.29)              Min: associate/junior college (0.21)      Min: high school (0.28)                      Min: high school (0.25)            Min: high school (0.23)
                  Max: less than high school (0.43)                                                                                           Max: less than high school (0.35)       Max: bachelor's (0.35)
Ethnicity                                                           Max: graduate (0.33)               Max: graduate (0.36)

                      DPD=0.04                                  DPD=0.04                                  DPD=0.03                                DPD=0.1                                 DPD=0.05
                   Min: black (0.3)                         Min: other (0.24)                         Min: black (0.28)                       Min: black (0.2)                        Min: other (0.23)
                  Max: white (0.34)                         Max: white (0.29)                         Max: white (0.31)                       Max: other (0.3)                        Max: white (0.28)

                                    DPD=0.52                                  DPD=0.63                                   DPD=0.5                                DPD=0.45                                DPD=0.36
                      Min: Other race or ethnicity (0.06)       Min: Other race or ethnicity (0.07)      Min: Other race or ethnicity (0.11)     Min: Other race or ethnicity (0.07)      Min: Other race or ethnicity (0.04)
                  Max: Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  Max: Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander  Max: American Indian or Alaskan native  Max: American Indian or Alaskan native  Max: Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander

                                       (0.58)                                     (0.7)                                    (0.61)                                  (0.52)                                   (0.4)

    Gender                       DPD=0.03                                  DPD=0.03                                  DPD=0.03                                DPD=0.03                                DPD=0.04
                            Min: female (0.32)                        Min: female (0.27)                         Min: female (0.3)                      Min: female (0.27)                      Min: female (0.26)
    Income                   Max: male (0.35)                          Max: male (0.29)                          Max: male (0.33)                        Max: male (0.29)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Max: male (0.3)
Neighborhood                     DPD=0.51                                  DPD=0.46                                   DPD=0.5                                DPD=0.48
                   Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.21)          Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.19)          Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.21)        Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.15)                      DPD=0.63
    Sexual         Max: $175,000 to $199,999 (0.72)          Max: $150,000 to $174,999 (0.65)          Max: $175,000 to $199,999 (0.71)        Max: $175,000 to $199,999 (0.63)        Min: $200,000 to $249,999 (0.09)
 Orientation                                                                                                                                                                           Max: $150,000 to $174,999 (0.71)
                                 DPD=0.14                                  DPD=0.11                                  DPD=0.13                                DPD=0.12
                             Min: Urban (0.25)                         Min: Urban (0.2)                          Min: Urban (0.23)                       Min: Urban (0.21)                           DPD=0.09
                          Max: Suburban (0.38)                      Max: Suburban (0.32)                      Max: Suburban (0.35)                    Max: Suburban (0.32)                      Min: Urban (0.23)
                                                                                                                                                                                              Max: Suburban (0.31)
                                 DPD=0.32                                  DPD=0.41                                  DPD=0.31                                DPD=0.48
                           Min: Asexual (0.23)               Min: Heterosexual/straight (0.24)                 Min: Bisexual (0.23)                    Min: Asexual (0.18)                           DPD=0.36
                  Max: Other sexual orientation (0.55)      Max: Other sexual orientation (0.66)      Max: Other sexual orientation (0.54)    Max: Other sexual orientation (0.66)    Min: Other sexual orientation (0.19)

                                                                                                                                                                                           Max: Gay or lesbian (0.55)

                                                                                                                                                                                      56
Table 5. Demographic Parity Difference (DPD) Results. This table summarizes the results of regression analyses measuring demographic parity differences
(DPD) across three tasks (GSS, Big Five, and economic games) for agents using demographic information, interview data, and persona-based profiles.
Interview-based agents consistently reduced bias compared to demographic-based agents across political ideology, race, and gender.

                                                                                                                                                                57
                                                         [Robustness Analysis]

                           GSS                           Big Five                      Economic Games                        GSS Num.

Interview                      Acc.=64.52(std=7.85)          MAE=0.67 (std=0.27)           MAE=0.51 (std=2.01)           MAE=0.14 (std=0.15)
                            Nrm.Acc.=0.82(std=0.13)
                                                                         --                            --                            --
                                            --             Correl.=0.79 (z std=0.73)      Correl.=0.52 (z std=0.9)     Correl.=0.97 (z std=0.82)
                             Correl.=0.72(zstd=0.24)     Nrm. Correl.=0.77 (std=0.76)  Nrm. Correl.=0.33 (std=1.22)  Nrm. Correl.=2.16 (std=9.17)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.84(std=0.13)
                                                                                                                         MAE=0.25 (std=0.17)
    Survey Agents             Acc.=64.25(std=12.11)           MAE=0.47 (std=2.0)            MAE=0.47 (std=2.0)
                            Nrm.Acc.=0.82(std=0.18)                                                                                  --
       (GSS+Big5)                                                        --                            --              Correl.=0.89 (z std=0.62)
   Remove only GSS                          --             Correl.=0.52 (z std=0.93)     Correl.=0.52 (z std=0.93)   Nrm. Correl.=2.05 (std=9.07)
outcome question out of      Correl.=0.70(zstd=0.24)     Nrm. Correl.=0.31 (std=1.22)  Nrm. Correl.=0.31 (std=1.22)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.82(std=0.14)                                                                    MAE=0.32 (std=0.19)
           input                                             MAE=0.68 (std=0.25)            MAE=0.47 (std=2.0)
                                                                                                                                     --
     Survey Agents             Acc.=60.57(std=7.82)                      --                            --              Correl.=0.75 (z std=0.62)
                            Nrm.Acc.=0.77(std=0.12)        Correl.=0.72 (z std=0.75)     Correl.=0.52 (z std=0.93)   Nrm. Correl.=1.74 (std=8.94)
       (GSS+Big5)                                        Nrm. Correl.=0.64 (std=0.61)  Nrm. Correl.=0.31 (std=1.22)
   Remove whole GSS                         --                                                                           MAE=0.24 (std=0.20)
question block from input    Correl.=0.70(zstd=0.22)         MAE=0.63 (std=0.26)           MAE=0.48 (std=2.01)
    when predicting on     Nrm.Correl.=0.82(std=0.14)                                                                                --
  question in that block                                                 --                            --              Correl.=0.87 (z std=0.63)
                              Acc.=66.81(std=12.91)        Correl.=0.79 (z std=0.75)     Correl.=0.57 (z std=0.87)   Nrm. Correl.=2.03 (std=8.88)
  Survey agents with        Nrm.Acc.=0.85(std=0.19)      Nrm. Correl.=0.76 (std=0.74)  Nrm. Correl.=0.43 (std=1.34)
        interview                                                                                                        MAE=0.28 (std=0.21)
                                            --               MAE=0.68 (std=0.26)            MAE=0.47 (std=2.0)
 (GSS+big5+interview)        Correl.=0.74(zstd=0.21)                                                                                 --
    Remove only GSS        Nrm.Correl.=0.87(std=0.14)                    --                            --              Correl.=0.78 (z std=0.71)
                                                           Correl.=0.77 (z std=0.75)     Correl.=0.55 (z std=0.93)   Nrm. Correl.=1.85 (std=9.19)
 outcome question out of       Acc.=68.42(std=7.02)      Nrm. Correl.=0.72 (std=0.78)  Nrm. Correl.=0.30 (std=1.29)
            input           Nrm.Acc.=0.87(std=0.13)                                                                      MAE=0.19 (std=0.18)
                                                              MAE=0.69 (std=0.3)            MAE=0.5 (std=2.0)
    Maximal agents                          --                                                                                       --
                             Correl.=0.75(zstd=0.24)                     --                            --              Correl.=0.93 (z std=0.82)
(GSS+big5+econ+interv      Nrm.Correl.=0.87(std=0.14)      Correl.=0.76 (z std=0.76)     Correl.=0.49 (z std=0.85)   Nrm. Correl.=0.92 (std=2.77)
            iew)                                         Nrm. Correl.=0.7 (std=0.67)   Nrm. Correl.=0.41 (std=1.1)
                                                                                                                         MAE=0.14 (std=0.15)
    Remove only GSS                                          MAE=0.67 (std=0.27)           MAE=0.51 (std=2.01)
 outcome question out of                                                                                                             --
                                                                         --                            --              Correl.=0.97 (z std=0.82)
            input                                          Correl.=0.79 (z std=0.73)      Correl.=0.52 (z std=0.9)   Nrm. Correl.=2.16 (std=9.17)
                                                         Nrm. Correl.=0.77 (std=0.76)  Nrm. Correl.=0.33 (std=1.22)
   Summary                     Acc.=63.61 (std=7.09)                                                                     MAE=0.16 (std=0.13)
                            Nrm. Acc.=0.81 (std=0.13)
Random lesion                                                                                                                        --
(0% removal)                                --                                                                         Correl.=0.95 (z std=0.81)
                             Correl.=0.72 (z std=0.23)                                                               Nrm. Correl.=1.46 (std=3.71)
                           Nrm. Correl.=0.84 (std=0.15)
                                                                                                                         MAE=0.16 (std=0.14)
                               Acc.=64.52(std=7.85)
                            Nrm.Acc.=0.82(std=0.13)                                                                                  --
                                                                                                                       Correl.=0.96 (z std=0.75)
                                            --                                                                       Nrm. Correl.=2.14 (std=9.15)
                             Correl.=0.72(zstd=0.24)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.84(std=0.13)                                                                    MAE=0.16 (std=0.12)

Random lesion                  Acc.=64.20(std=7.58)          MAE=0.66 (std=0.28)           MAE=0.52 (std=2.02)                       --
(20% removal)               Nrm.Acc.=0.82(std=0.14)                                                                    Correl.=0.95 (z std=0.81)
                                                                         --                            --            Nrm. Correl.=1.96 (std=9.02)
                                            --             Correl.=0.79 (z std=0.74)     Correl.=0.58 (z std=0.89)
                             Correl.=0.71(zstd=0.22)     Nrm. Correl.=0.75 (std=0.72)  Nrm. Correl.=0.46 (std=1.18)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.84(std=0.14)

Random lesion                  Acc.=63.77(std=7.30)          MAE=0.65 (std=0.28)          MAE=0.52 (std=2.02)
(40% removal)               Nrm.Acc.=0.81(std=0.12)
                                                                         --                            --
                                            --             Correl.=0.78 (z std=0.74)     Correl.=0.63 (z std=0.9)
                             Correl.=0.71(zstd=0.21)     Nrm. Correl.=0.75 (std=0.74)  Nrm. Correl.=0.5 (std=1.21)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.84(std=0.13)

Random lesion                  Acc.=64.35(std=7.24)          MAE=0.65 (std=0.29)            MAE=0.48 (std=2.0)
(60% removal)               Nrm.Acc.=0.82(std=0.13)
                                                                         --                            --
                                            --             Correl.=0.77 (z std=0.74)     Correl.=0.57 (z std=0.91)
                             Correl.=0.72(zstd=0.20)     Nrm. Correl.=0.73 (std=0.68)  Nrm. Correl.=0.41 (std=1.33)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.85(std=0.14)

                                                                                                                     58
Random lesion      Acc.=62.03(std=7.37)        MAE=0.64 (std=0.26)           MAE=0.52 (std=2.01)          MAE=0.18 (std=0.15)
(80% removal)   Nrm.Acc.=0.79(std=0.12)
                                                           --                            --                            --
                                --           Correl.=0.75 (z std=0.72)     Correl.=0.62 (z std=0.93)    Correl.=0.96 (z std=0.76)
                 Correl.=0.71(zstd=0.21)   Nrm. Correl.=0.73 (std=0.74)  Nrm. Correl.=0.46 (std=1.19)  Nrm. Correl.=2.0 (std=9.09)
               Nrm.Correl.=0.84(std=0.12)

Table 6. Robustness analysis. This table presents the results of an exploratory robustness analysis comparing
different agent architectures informed by various data sources, including interviews, surveys, experiments, and
summaries. All analyses are conducted on a random subsample of the same 100 agents. Performance is evaluated
across four constructs: the General Social Survey (GSS), GSS Numeric (GSS Num.), Big Five Personality Traits
(Big Five), and economic games. We use two `hold-out' strategies for the GSS results when using GSS data in the
input (indicated in the far left column): we either remove just the outcome question we are predicting on from the
input, or we are removing the whole question block a given outcome question is in from the input. The latter ensures
the input has few related questions as the outcome question, whereas the former will have related--but not
identical--questions in input and output. For the big-5 and economic games, we always hold-out the whole question
block a given outcome question is in. Results indicate that agents with interview data only perform well, achieving
high normalized accuracy (0.82, std=0.13) on the GSS when just using the interviews. Maximal agents, which
integrate data from all sources, show even better performance (0.87, std=0.13). Summary agents perform slightly
below interview-based agents, with minor losses in accuracy (0.81, std = 0.13). A progressive decline is observed
for random lesion agents as portions of interview data are removed, with accuracy dropping from 0.82 to 0.79 as
80% of the utterances are excluded, suggesting that even shortened interviews retain valuable insights.

                                                                                                       59
                      Five social-science studies

Human replication            Accuracy=0.48 (std=0.14)
         rate                 Correl.=0.61 (z std=0.34)

      Interview                 Acc.=0.24(std=0.15)
                             Nrm.Acc.=0.50 (std=0.12)
  Survey Agents
     (GSS+Big5)                             --
                               Correl.=0.34 (std=0.16)
                           Nrm. Correl.=0.56 (std=0.28)

                                             ­
                      Correlation with treatment effects: 0.93

                                Acc.=0.24(std=0.15)
                            Nrm.Acc.=0.52(std=0.11)

                                            --
                              Correl.=0.33(std=0.14)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.38(std=0.25)

 Survey agents with                         --
       interview      Correlation with treatment effects: 0.91

(GSS+big5+interview)            Acc.=0.25(std=0.16)
                            Nrm.Acc.=0.53(std=0.12)
     Demographic
                                            --
        Persona               Correl.=0.34(std=0.15)
                           Nrm.Correl.=0.38(std=0.29)

                                            --
                      Correlation with treatment effects: 0.99

                                Acc.=0.21(std=0.16)
                             Nrm.Acc.=0.45 (std=0.14)

                                            --
                               Correl.=0.31 (std=0.17)
                           Nrm. Correl.=0.32 (std=0.34)

                                             ­
                      Correlation with treatment effects: 0.93

                                Acc.=0.23(std=0.16)
                             Nrm.Acc.=0.48 (std=0.14)

                                            --
                               Correl.=0.33 (std=0.17)
                           Nrm. Correl.=0.54 (std=0.35)

                                             ­
                      Correlation with treatment effects: 0.94

Table 6 (continued). Robustness analysis. This table presents the results of an exploratory robustness analysis
comparing different agent architectures informed by various data sources. Performance is evaluated for the five
social science experiments. All analyses are conducted on the full agent bank. The correlation and accuracy between
predicted and actual treatment effects is calculated by comparing the vector of predicted treatment effects with
actual treatment effects. The correlation between sample-level predicted and actual means is calculated by
comparing the vector of the means for all outcomes in all five studies with the actual means. Accuracy is assessed on
all the outcomes in these studies and so are correlations. Human replication rates are assessed by comparing the
humans in wave 1 and wave 2.

                                                                60
                                             [Interview Script]

                                             Script                                                               Time Limit (sec)

Hi, <participant's name>! My name is Isabella, and I'm an AI assistant who will be conducting today's             0

interview with you. Thank you so much for choosing to participate in our study!

Before we start, please take a moment to familiarize yourself with the controls on your screen. The button
labeled 'Show Isabella's Subtitles' will display subtitles for my dialogue, while the pause button will take you
back to the homepage that led you to this interview screen. Please note, however, that this interview is
intended to be completed in one sitting. While it's okay to pause the interview if unexpected events occur or
if you need a break, we recommend trying to complete the interview in one sitting.

Please also be aware that if you pause the interview, you will be asked to resume from the last saved
checkpoint. You will know when you have passed a checkpoint by a flash of green light around the circle
displaying my avatar, accompanied by a message that says 'Saved.' If we lose connection for more than a
minute during the interview, a red button will appear, allowing you to refresh the page and resume from the
last saved checkpoint.

This is a semi-structured interview expected to take roughly two hours. For completeness, I may ask a few
questions that might seem repetitive along the way. As described in the consent form, this interview will
cover your life experiences as well as your views on various social topics. The content of this interview will
be a part of our dataset that will be shared with scientific researchers to better understand the lived
experiences of those being interviewed.

Finally, you may speak when a microphone icon appears in the circle displaying my avatar. Please stop the
interview now if any of this is not ok.

If all this sounds good, let's get started!

To start, I would like to begin with a big question: tell me the story of your life. Start from the beginning --  625

from your childhood, to education, to family and relationships, and to any major life events you may have

had.

Some people tell us that they've reached a crossroads at some points in their life where multiple paths were      235

available, and their choice then made a significant difference in defining who they are. What about you? Was

there a moment like that for you, and if so, could you tell me the whole story about that from start to finish?

Some people tell us they made a conscious choice or decision in moments like these, while others say it 'just     50

happened'. What about you?

Do you think another person or an organization could have lent a helping hand during moments like this?           40

Moving to present time, tell me more about family who are important to you. Do you have a partner, or             310

children?

Are there anyone else in your immediate family whom you have not mentioned? Who are they, and what is             25

your relationship with them like?

Tell me about anyone else in your life we haven't discussed (like friends or romantic partners). Are there        80

people outside of your family who are important to you?

Now let's talk about your current neighborhood. Tell me all about the neighborhood and area in which you          105

are living now.

Some people say they feel really safe in their neighborhoods, others not so much. How about for you?              40

Living any place has its ups and downs. Tell me about what it's been like for you living here.                    40

Tell me about the people who live with you right now, even people who are staying here temporarily.               80

Is anyone in your household a temporary member, or is everyone a permanent member of the household?               10

Tell me about anyone else who stays here from time to time, if there is anyone like that                          10

Is there anyone who usually lives here but is away ­ traveling, at school, or in a hospital?                      10

                                                                                                                       61
Right now, across a typical week, how do your days vary?                                                       105
                                                                                                               105
At what kind of job or jobs do you work, and when do you work?                                                 80
                                                                                                               80
Do you have other routines or responsibilities that you did not already share?                                 80

Tell me about any recent changes to your daily routine.                                                        80
                                                                                                               40
If you have children, tell me about a typical weekday during the school year for your children. What is their  40
daily routine? And what are after school activities your children participate in?
                                                                                                               80
Some people we've talked to tell us about experiences with law enforcement. How about for you?                 310
                                                                                                               115
What other experiences with law enforcement stand out in your mind?                                            105

Some people tell us about experiences of arrest ­ of loved ones, family members, friends, or themselves.       105
How about for you?                                                                                             105
                                                                                                               50
Some people say they vote in every election, some tell us they don't vote at all. How about you?
                                                                                                               80
How would you describe your political views?
                                                                                                               80
Tell me about any recent changes in your political views.                                                      65
                                                                                                               80
One topic a lot of people have been talking about recently is race and/or racism and policing. Some tell us
issues raised by the Black Lives Matter movement have affected them a lot, some say they've affected them      50
somewhat, others say they haven't affected them at all. How about for you?
                                                                                                               80
How have you been thinking about the issues Black Lives Matter raises?                                         80

How have you been thinking about race in the U.S. recently?                                                    80

How have you responded to the increased focus on race and/or racism and policing? Some people tell us          80
they're aware of the issue but keep their thoughts to themselves, others say they've talked to family and      80
friends, others have joined protests. What about you?
                                                                                                               80
What about people you're close to? How have they responded to the increased focus on race and/or racism        50
and policing?                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                               115
Now we'd like to learn more about your health. First, tell me all about your health.
                                                                                                                        62
For you, what makes it easy or hard to stay healthy?

Tell me about anything big that has happened in the past two years related to your health: any medical
diagnoses, flare-ups of chronic conditions, broken bones, pain ­ anything like that.

Sometimes, health problems get in the way. They can even affect people's ability to work or care for their
children. How about you?

Sometimes, it's not your health problem, but the health of a loved one. Has this been an issue for you?

Tell me what it has been like trying to get the health care you or your immediate family need. Have you ever
had to forgo getting the health care you need?

Have you or your immediate family ever used alternative forms of medicine? This might include indigenous,
non-western, or informal forms of care.

During tough times, some people tell us they cope by smoking or drinking. How about for you?

Other people say they cope by relying on prescriptions, pain medications, marijuana, or other substances.
How about for you and can you describe your most recent experience of using them, if any?

How are you and your family coping with, or paying for, your health care needs right now?

Some people are excited about medical vaccination, and others, not so much. How about you?

What are your trusted sources of information about the vaccine?

Now we're going to talk a bit more about what life was like for you over the past year. Tell me all about how
you have been feeling.                                                                                        80
                                                                                                              80
Tell me a story about a time in the last year when you were in a rough place or struggling emotionally.       50
                                                                                                              155
Some people say they struggle with depression, anxiety, or something else like that. How about for you?
                                                                                                              115
How has it been for your family?
                                                                                                              50
Some people say that religion or spirituality is important in their lives, for others not so much. How about
you?                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                              25
Some people tell us they use Facebook, Instagram, or other social media to stay connected with the wider
world. How about for you? Tell me all about how you use these types of platforms.                             10
                                                                                                              10
Some people say they use Facebook or Twitter to get (emotional or financial) support during tough times.      10
What about you?                                                                                                5
                                                                                                              50
Tell me about any recent changes in your level of stress, worry, and your emotional coping strategies.
                                                                                                              50
This might be repetitive, but before we go on to the next section, I want to quickly make sure I have this
right: who are you living with right now?                                                                     50
                                                                                                              50
Any babies or small children?
                                                                                                              40
Anyone who usually lives here but is away ­ traveling, at school, or in a hospital?                           80

Any lodgers, boarders, or employees who live here?                                                            80

Who shares the responsibility for the rent, mortgage, or other household expenses?                            50

Now we'd like to talk about how you make ends meet and what the monthly budget looks like for you and         65
your family. What were your biggest expenses last month?
                                                                                                              155
How much did your household spend in the past month? Is that the usual amount? And if not, how much do
you usually spend and on what?                                                                                40
                                                                                                              40
Does your household own or rent your home?
                                                                                                              15
Bills can fluctuate over the course of a year. Seasons change, there are holidays and special events, school  15
starts and ends, and so on. Tell me all about how your bills have fluctuated over the past year.              25

Tell me all about how you coped with any extra expenses in the past months.                                            63

Some people have a savings account, some people save in a different way, and some people say they don't
save. How about you?

Some people save for big things, like a home, while others save for a rainy day. How about for you (in the
last year)?

Some people have student loans or credit card debt. Others take out loans from family or friends or find
other ways of borrowing money. Tell me about all the debts you're paying on right now.

Tell me about any time during the past year that you haven't had enough money to buy something that you
needed or pay a bill that was due.

What is or was your occupation? In this occupation, what kind of work do you do and what are the most
important activities or duties?

Was your occupation covered by a union or employee association contract?

In the past year, how many weeks did you work (for a few hours, including paid vacation, paid sick leave,
and military service)?

How many hours each week did you usually work?

In the past week, did you work for pay (even for 1 hour) at a job or business?

Did you have more than one job or business, including part time, evening, or weekend work?
Now, in the past month, how many jobs did you work, including part time, evening, or weekend work?               25
                                                                                                                 50
For your job or occupations, how much money did you receive in the past month?                                   25
                                                                                                                 50
How often do you get paid?                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                 15
In total, how much did your household make in the past month?
                                                                                                                 15
Switching gears a bit, let's talk a little about tax time. Did you file taxes last year (the most recent year)?
                                                                                                                 80
Tell me more about your workplace. How long have you been at your current job? How would you describe
the benefits that come with your job? (This could include things like health benefits, paid time off, vacation,  15
and sick time.)                                                                                                  25

How would you describe your relationships at work? (How is your relationship with your manager or boss?          50
How are your relationships with your coworkers?)
                                                                                                                 50
Tell me about how predictable your work schedule is. How would you describe your job in terms of
flexibility with your hours?                                                                                     105
                                                                                                                 40
Some people say it's hard to take or keep a job because of child care. How about for you?
                                                                                                                 25
Do you receive any payments or benefits from SNAP, food stamps, housing voucher payments, supplemental           25
security income, or any other programs like that?
                                                                                                                 25
Tell me about times over the last year when your income was especially low. And tell me about all the things     15
you did to make ends meet during that time.                                                                      15
                                                                                                                 15
What would it be like for you if you had to spend $400 for an emergency? Would you have the money, and if        15
not, how would you get it?                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                 15
Overall, how do you feel about your financial situation?                                                         15
                                                                                                                 80
Are you now married, widowed, divorced, separated, or have you never been married? If you are not
currently married, are you currently living with a romantic partner?                                             50
                                                                                                                 25
For our records, we also need your date of birth. Could you please provide that?                                 25
                                                                                                                 25
Were you born in the United States? If you were not born in the U.S., what country were you born, and what       15
year did you first come to the U.S. to live?
                                                                                                                          64
What city and state were you born in?

Are you of Hispanic, Latinx, or Spanish origin?

What race or races do you identify with?

What is the highest degree or grade you've completed?

Are you enrolled in school?

Have you been enrolled in school during the past 3 months?

Have you ever served on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces, Reserves, or National Guard?

What religion do you identify with, if any?

Generally speaking, do you usually think of yourself as a Democrat, a Republican, an Independent, or what?
And how strongly do you associate with that party?

Do you think of yourself as closer to the Democratic Party or to the Republican Party?

What was the city and state that you lived in when you were 16 years old?

Did you live with both your own mother and father when you were 16?

Who else did you live with?

What's the highest degree or grade your dad completed?
What's the highest degree or grade your mom completed?                                                      15

Did your mom work for pay for at least a year while you were growing up?                                    15

What was her job? What kind of work did she do? What were her most important activities or duties?          50

What kind of place did she work for? What kind of business was it? What did they make or do where she       50

worked?

Did your dad work for pay for at least a year while you were growing up?                                    15

What was his job? What kind of work did he do? What were his most important activities or duties?           50

What kind of place did he work for? What kind of business was it? What did they make or do where he         50

worked?

We all have hopes about what our future will look like. Imagine yourself a few years from now. Maybe you    155

want your life to be the same in some ways as it is now. Maybe you want it to be different in some ways.

What do you hope for?

What do you value the most in your life?                                                                    80

And that was the last question I wanted to ask today. Thank you so much again for your time <participant's  0

name>. It was really wonderful getting to know you through this interview. Now, we will take you back to

the Home Screen so that you may finish the rest of the study!

Table 7. The interview script used to guide two-hour conversations with participants, adapted from the American
Voices Project's interview. The script covers a wide range of topics, from participants' life stories to their views on
social, political, and personal values. Select portions were abbreviated to ensure a manageable session length, while
still capturing the breadth of experiences and perspectives essential for building nuanced generative agents.

                                                                                                                 65
General Social Survey        Accuracy        Normalized        Correlation      Normalized
                                               Accuracy                         Correlation
 Participant Replication  81.25% (std=8.11)  1.00 (std=0.00)   0.83 (std=0.30)  1.00 (std=0.00)
   Agents w/ Interview    68.85% (std=6.01)                    0.66 (std=0.19)
                          57.00% (std=7.45)  0.85 (std=0.11 )  0.51 (std=0.19)  0.83 (std=0.31)
Agents w/ Demog. Info.    56.79% (std=7.76)                    0.50 (std=0.20)
Agents w/ Persona Desc.                      0.71 (std=0.11)                    0.63 (std=0.26)

                                             0.70 (std=0.11)                    0.62 (std=0.25)

Big Five                  Mean Absolute      -                 Correlation      Normalized
                                                                                Correlation
                          Error                                0.95 (std=0.76)  1.00 (std=0.00)
                                                               0.78 (std=0.70)
Participant Replication   0.30 (std=0.17)    -                 0.61 (std=0.70)  0.80 (std=1.88)
                                                               0.71 (std=0.73)
Agents w/ Interview       0.67 (std=0.27)    -                                  0.55 (std=2.25)

Agents w/ Demog. Info.    0.76 (std=0.32)    -                                  0.75 (std=2.59)

Agents w/ Persona Desc.   0.74 (std=0.32)    -

Economic Games            Mean Absolute      -                 Correlation      Normalized
                                                                                Correlation
                          Error                                0.99 (std=1.00)  1.00 (std=0.00)
                                                               0.66 (std=0.95)
Participant Replication   0.25 (std=0.88)    -                 0.57 (std=0.91)  0.66 (std=2.83)
                                                               0.60 (std=0.93)
Agents w/ Interview       0.32 (std=0.89)    -                                  0.48 (std=2.90)

Agents w/ Demog. Info.    0.34 (std=0.89)    -                                  0.57 (std=2.84)

Agents w/ Persona Desc.   0.33 (std=0.88)    -

Table 8. Generative agents' predictive performance. The consistency rate between participants and the predictive
performance of generative agents is evaluated across various constructs and averaged across individuals. For the
General Social Survey (GSS), accuracy is reported due to its categorical response types, while the Big Five
personality traits and economic games report mean absolute error (MAE) due to their numerical response types.
Correlation is reported for all constructs. Normalized accuracy is provided for all metrics, except for MAE, which
cannot be calculated for individuals whose MAE is 0 (i.e., those who responded the same way in both phases). We
find that generative agents predict participants' behavior and attitudes well, especially when compared to
participants' own rate of internal consistency. Additionally, using interviews to inform agent behavior significantly
improves the predictive performance of agents for both GSS and Big Five constructs, outperforming other
commonly used methods in the literature.

                                                                                                 66
