Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  Political Analysis (2024), 32, 401ｭ416
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            doi:10.1017/pan.2024.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ARTICLE

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Synthetic Replacements for Human Survey Data?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The Perils of Large Language Models

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            James Bisbee , Joshua D. Clinton, Cassy Dorff, Brenton Kenkel and Jennifer M. Larson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Political Science Department, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Corresponding author: James Bisbee; Email: james.h.bisbee@vanderbilt.edu

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Received 2 May 2023; revised 18 January 2024; accepted 20 January 2024; published online 17 May 2024)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Abstract
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Large language models (LLMs) offer new research possibilities for social scientists, but their potential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               as "synthetic data" is still largely unknown. In this paper, we investigate how accurately the popular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LLM ChatGPT can recover public opinion, prompting the LLM to adopt different "personas" and then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               provide feeling thermometer scores for 11 sociopolitical groups. The average scores generated by ChatGPT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               correspond closely to the averages in our baseline survey, the 2016ｭ2020 American National Election Study
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (ANES). Nevertheless, sampling by ChatGPT is not reliable for statistical inference: there is less variation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in responses than in the real surveys, and regression coefficients often differ significantly from equivalent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               estimates obtained using ANES data. We also document how the distribution of synthetic responses varies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               with minor changes in prompt wording, and we show how the same prompt yields significantly different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               results over a 3-month period. Altogether, our findings raise serious concerns about the quality, reliability,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and reproducibility of synthetic survey data generated by LLMs.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Keywords: ChatGPT; synthetic data; public opinion; research ethics

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Edited by: Jeff Gill

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Public opinion polling is seemingly in a crisis (Shapiro 2019). Costs are increasing, response rates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            are declining (Keeter et al. 2017), and there are growing concerns about inaccuracy (Clinton et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2021a; Clinton, Lapinski, and Trussler 2022; Kennedy et al. 2018). At the same time, polls are necessary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tools to assess and address growing concerns about polarization and democratic backsliding (Graham
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2023; Waldner and Lust 2018). When done well, public opinion polls allow scholars, policymakers,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and journalists to assess the opinions of the whole public--not just those who are the most active,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            willing, and able to express their opinions through more costly means like direct appeals, protests, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            donations.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Given the rising expense and difficulty of interviewing respondents, researchers increasingly turn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to other methods of characterizing public opinion and sentiment, such as relying on non-survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            data (Beauchamp 2017; Tucker 2017) or implementing sophisticated weighting methods (Bisbee 2019;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Caughey and Warshaw 2015; Gelman 1997; Ghitza and Gelman 2013; Goplerud 2024; Lax and Phillips
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2009).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Large language models (LLMs) that synthesize vast corpora of human-generated text might look
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            like the new frontier in characterizing public opinion without the expense of traditional polling.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Social scientists have already used LLMs to label political data (Gilardi, Alizadeh, and Kubli 2023;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tnberg 2023), estimate politicians' ideology (Wu et al. 2023), and generate synthetic samples for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pilot testing (Argyle et al. 2023; Horton 2023). At least one start-up in private industry suggests that

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ｩ The Author(s), 2024. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of The Society for Political Methodology.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            by/4.0), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  402 James Bisbee et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "synthetic users" can supplement or replace human respondents in development and marketing,1 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            there is a growing interest among polling companies to explore the opportunities promised by synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            data.2 But can a pretrained LLM produce synthetic opinions for respondent personas that accurately
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            mirror what similar human respondents would say on a real survey?3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We evaluate this question by prompting ChatGPT 3.5 Turbo4 (OpenAI 2021) to first adopt various
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            personas defined by demographic and political characteristics5 and then answer a battery of questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            about feelings toward social and political groups. We refer to these responses as "synthetic data,"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            which is occasionally referred to in related research as "silicon samples" (Argyle et al. 2023).6 To
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            facilitate comparison to widely used public opinion data, the characteristics defining each persona in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            our synthetic data are taken from real respondents in the 2016 and 2020 American National Election
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Study (ANES), and our survey questions closely mirror the ANES's feeling thermometer questions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Our primary analysis compares the distribution of responses from synthetic ChatGPT personas to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            matching corresponding respondents in the ANES. We focus on three metrics of interest to social scien-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tists: (1) how well ChatGPT recovers the overall mean and variance of feelings toward various groups, (2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            how closely the (conditional) correlations between persona characteristics and survey responses mirror
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the inferences we would draw from the ANES, and (3) the sensitivity of our comparisons to changes in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the prompt, the LLM, and the timing of data collection.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               At the coarsest level of analysis, synthetic ChatGPT opinions look remarkably similar to human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ANES respondents. However, even when we compare overall average responses, we find problems with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            how well ChatGPT recovers the distribution of public opinion, both in terms of conditional averages and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in terms of precision. The synthetic sample fares worse when we examine higher-order relationships.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            When we regress feeling thermometer scores on respondents' demographic attributes--the type of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            analysis common in public opinion research--the synthetic sample would frequently lead us to draw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            different inferences than if we relied on human respondents. 48% of coefficients estimated from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ChatGPT responses are statistically significantly different from their ANES-derived counterpart; among

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1https://www.syntheticusers.com.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2For example, the American Association for Public Opinion Research has hosted several events discussing the opportunities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and challenges in using AI in survey research, such as the NYAAPOR events of May 3, 2023 and October 18, 2023.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3We rely on the corpus contained in a pretrained LLM rather than fine-tuning because this workflow is more accessible and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            more likely to be used by journalists, politicians, and the modal academic (Cowen 2022).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4We focus on ChatGPT 3.5 Turbo because its release was what prompted the flurry of researcher and public interest that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            initially motivated this project. More practically, it was the largest and most popular pretrained LLM with public API access
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            at the time we began our research. However, this also brings potential limitations, especially when considering the substantial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) that has gone into the public-facing version of the AI. As we discuss in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            more detail in Supporting Information (SI) Section 1, we know that some elements of ChatGPT are biased against precisely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the types of responses we ask for--namely, appraisals of certain social groups. While we have successfully engineered a prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that overcomes these RLHF constraints, we recognize that there are trade-offs in this choice, prompting us to explore other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LLMs. Specifically, we replicate some of our results using the even larger ChatGPT 4.0 and the open-source model Falcon-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40B-Instruct (see SI Sections 11 and 14 for details).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5By prompting the LLM to adopt particular characteristics, including party identification and political ideology, we differ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from earlier research identifying political bias in the "default" persona (Rozado 2023; Santurkar et al. 2023). In an auxiliary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            analysis, we find similar results on ChatGPT's default bias (see SI Section 7).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6Our approach differs in the details from Argyle et al. (2023) who provide a mock transcript between an interviewer and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the respondent to generate their "silicon" samples. In contrast, we simply ask ChatGPT 3.5 to adopt a given persona to collect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            our synthetic data.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7Argyle et al. (2023, 340) propose evaluating algorithmic fidelity using four standards: (1) Social Science Turing Test (i.e.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            "Generated responses are indistinguishable from parallel human texts"), (2) Backward Continuity ("Generated responses are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            consistent with the attitudes and sociodemographic information of its input such that humans viewing the responses can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            infer key elements of that input"), (3) Forward Continuity ("Generated responses proceed naturally from the conditioning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            context provided, reliably reflecting the form, tone, and content of the context"), and (4) Pattern Correspondence ("Generated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            responses reflect underlying patterns of relationships between ideas, demographics, and behavior that would be observed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in comparable human-produced data"). Our evaluation largely focuses on the Social Science Turing Test and Pattern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Correspondence, with some evaluation of Forward Continuity when looking at the effect of various prompts.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                                                  Political Analysis 403

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            these cases, the sign of the effect flips 32% of the time. Simply put, researchers cannot take for granted
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that responses from a pretrained LLM will match traditional survey data.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Beyond statistical mismatches, we also demonstrate that synthetic data fail even the most basic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            requirements for replication. The most concerning of these is that the distribution of responses to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            same prompt changed between our initial run in April 2023 and a rerun in July 2023 due to changes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in the underlying algorithm. This is a key illustration of how closed-source generative models pose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a threat to the reproducibility norms of contemporary social science (Spirling 2023). Besides these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reproducibility issues, we also find that the distribution of results is sensitive to small differences in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            prompt, raising concerns about researcher degrees of freedom and the issues associated with making
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            data-dependent analytical decisions (Gelman and Loken 2014).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Our findings raise serious questions about the use and performance of LLMs for the characterization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of public opinion and the creation of synthetic data, connecting with a growing body of research that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            asks similar questions (Bender et al. 2021; Spirling 2023) and documents similar issues (Abdulhai et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2023; Cao et al. 2023; Motoki, Pinho Neto, and Rodrigues 2023; Rozado 2023). When we prompt LLMs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to adopt personas matching actual ANES respondents, the resulting data largely fail to replicate our best
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            estimates of the correlates of human opinion.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1. Research Design and Data

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            An LLM is a prediction algorithm optimized to predict the next token in a sequence of text data.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            When prompted to take on a persona with a set of attributes and answer a question from that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            perspective, contemporary LLMs can provide convincingly coherent responses. The largest models have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            demonstrated remarkable emergent abilities well outside the text-sequencing tasks at the core of their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            training (Wei et al. 2022). The uncanny coherence of LLM responses to a wide variety of prompts have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            generated considerable excitement about the possibility of using these models to generate responses that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            are representative of public opinion. For example, Argyle et al. (2023) conclude that "by conditioning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the model on thousands of socioeconomic backstories from real human[s]," LLMs are able to generate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            synthetic opinions that "reflect[] the complex interplay between ideas, attitudes, and sociocultural
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            context that characterize human attitudes."9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               But does this imply that we can replace human samples altogether? If we ask an LLM to act as though
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            it were a 30-year-old white male Republican with a high-school degree and ask about its feelings toward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Democrats, can we expect its responses to mirror the distribution of human opinions in that group?10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The vast corpus used to train these models (see, e.g., Washington Post 2023) contains reams of political
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            writing that could, perhaps, be used to construct nuanced depictions of opinions across groups. But
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            when that vast corpus comes from the Internet, the content may be unrepresentative of the public at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            large, or at least some groups within it (Bail 2022). Scholars have probed the default persona of ChatGPT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            by prompting it to answer a battery of survey questions and showing that the resulting responses have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ideological, dispositional, and psychological biases (Abdulhai et al. 2023; Bail 2022; Motoki, Pinho Neto,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and Rodrigues 2023; Rozado 2023). Consistent with prior findings, Section 7 of the SI confirms that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            prompting ChatGPT to adopt the persona of an "average" citizen produces responses that are closer to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            those of Democrats than Republicans.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8It is possible that the ANES is worse at recovering the true population parameters of interest than the LLM, perhaps due to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the issues with current public opinion polling discussed above. However, without a census of public opinion against which to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            compare, it seems irresponsible to jump to this interpretation of the discrepancies we document below between the synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and human samples.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9Argyle et al. (2023) use GPT-3, a predecessor to the GPT-3.5 LLM underlying the ChatGPT program we query in our main
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            analysis.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10Our main analysis focuses on whether we can do this. A more fundamental question that we return to in the conclusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            is whether we should.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  404 James Bisbee et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               How well pretrained LLMs can reproduce human opinion when prompted to adopt a particular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            persona is less clear. Our approach is to generate a dataset of synthetic opinions from ChatGPT about
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            contemporary politics in the United States that we compare to opinions from a survey of matched human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            respondents from the 2016 and 2020 American National Election surveys.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               To examine a pretrained LLM's ability to simulate the opinions of respondents defined by a particular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            set of features, we use a survey instrument known as a "feeling thermometer." Respondents are instructed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to consider some group and to indicate the degree to which they experience warm (positive, affectionate,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            etc.) or cool (negative, disdainful, etc.) feelings toward members of that group. This instrument has been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            employed by major polling outfits since 1964, and it is widely used by scholars to characterize the extent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of societal division (Druckman and Levendusky 2019; Iyengar and Westwood 2019). After instructing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the LLM to adopt a persona defined by a set of respondent characteristics, we then ask it to answer a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            battery of feeling thermometer questions. We choose respondent personas and feeling thermometers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to match questions that human respondents were asked in a real public opinion survey, allowing us to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gauge how accurately and precisely the synthetic LLM responses capture actual public opinion.11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We conduct our primary investigation using perhaps the most publicized and popular software built
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            on a pretrained LLM, ChatGPT 3.5 Turbo (OpenAI 2021). To characterize how robust our results are to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            differences across LLMs (as well as changes in the "same" LLM over time), we replicate portions of our
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            analysis with ChatGPT 4.0, with ChatGPT 3.5 Turbo both before and after its update on June 25, 2023,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and with the open-source model Falcon-40B-Instruct.12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We iterate several different versions of a prompt to gather our synthetic data, the full description of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            which can be found in SI Section 1. Our main results are based on the most detailed version of a prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in which we instruct ChatGPT to adopt a persona defined as follows:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "It is [YEAR]. You are a [AGE] year-old, [MARST], [RACETH][GENDER] with [EDUCATION]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               making [INCOME] per year, living in the United States. You are [IDEO], [REGIS][PID] who
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [INTEREST] pays attention to what's going on in government and politics."13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            In each query to ChatGPT, the characteristics in brackets are substituted with values corresponding to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a real respondent in the 2016 or 2020 wave of the ANES. These values include:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [YEAR]: 2016 or 2020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [AGE]: age in years of ANES respondent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [RACETH]: non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, or Hispanic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [GENDER]: male or female
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [MARST]: divorced, married, separated, single, or widowed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [EDUCATION]: a high school diploma, some college but no degree, a bachelor's degree or more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [INCOME]: $30k, $50k, $80k, $100k, $150k or more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [IDEO]: an extremely liberal, a liberal, a slightly liberal, a moderate, a slightly conservative, a

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  conservative, an extremely conservative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [REGIS]: registered, unregistered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [PID]: Democrat, Independent, Republican
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ [INTEREST]: never, sometimes, frequently, regularly, always

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11We also test a battery of other questions that rely on conventional Likert-style survey instruments, pertaining to the role
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of government in the economy, and to restrictions placed on protesters and revolutionaries. These results can be found in SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Section 12.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12Highlighting issues with replicability, our original analyses were conducted on the pre-June 25 version of ChatGPT 3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Turbo, but that version was only accessible until September 2023.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               13We chose these covariates based on their utilization for weighting and poststratification in the survey methods literature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Ghitza and Gelman 2013; Lax and Phillips 2009), as well as adhering to the norms of weight calculation in the ANES itself
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (DeBell and Krosnick 2009). In Section 3.1, we demonstrate that the synthetic data are sensitive to which attributes are included
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in the prompt, finding that the majority of the performance hinges on the political covariates.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                                                  Political Analysis 405

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               For our primary analyses, the LLM is then prompted as follows:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               "Provide responses from this person's perspective. Use only knowledge about politics that they
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               would have. Format the output as a tsv table with the following format:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  group,thermometer,explanation,confidence

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The following questions ask about individuals' feelings toward different groups. Responses should
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               be given on a scale from 0 (meaning cold feelings) to 100 (meaning warm feelings). Ratings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               between 50 degrees and 100 degrees mean that you feel favorable and warm toward the group.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ratings between 0 degrees and 50 degrees mean that you don't feel favorable toward the group and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               that you don't care too much for that group. You would rate the group at the 50 degree mark if you
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               don't feel particularly warm or cold toward the group.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  How do you feel toward the following groups?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The Democratic Party?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  The Republican Party?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Democrats?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Republicans?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Black Americans?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  White Americans?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hispanic Americans?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Asian Americans?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Muslims?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Christians?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Immigrants?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Gays and Lesbians?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jews?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Liberals?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conservatives?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Women?"14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We prompt 30 synthetic respondents for each of the 7,530 human respondents in the ANES survey,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            yielding a final dataset of 3,614,400 responses.15 For each response, we record both the numeric feeling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            thermometer score, the explanation provided by the LLM for why they chose the score, and a measure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of the model's reported confidence in the response.16 In our main analyses below, we rely on the average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            response from the 30 synthetic respondents drawn for each human, except when calculating uncertainty,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            where we rely on only the first synthetic response.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2. Results

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            We evaluate the synthetic data's quality in three ways. We begin by comparing means and variances to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            demonstrate that although ChatGPT appears to perform reasonably well at recovering overall averages,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14We asked for feelings toward all groups in a single prompt for our main results. We tested whether asking about each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            group separately yielded substantively different results, and did not find this to matter.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15Data collection issues prevented us from yielding exactly 30 synthetic respondents for each person (e.g., when ChatGPT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            would not format the data correctly). The vast majority of human respondents were paired with exactly 30 synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            respondents, and each human respondent was paired with at least 10. We find that these errors were significantly more likely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            for some groups (the political parties, liberals and conservatives, and gays and lesbians); and for personas that are less educated,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            unregistered, white, Democrat, male, and less wealthy. However, none of these differences amount to more than one or two
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            missing synthetic samples out of 30. Importantly, we found little evidence of these errors being the product of the AI refusing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to provide an answer, but were instead due to incorrectly formatted tsv results. See SI Section 1 for details.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               16We use the explanation and the confidence for validation tests of our results presented in our SI Section 5, testing whether
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the explanations for a given temperature cohere with the score chosen and whether the LLM reports lower confidence for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            certain target groups or certain personas than others.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  406 James Bisbee et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            it is often biased and overly confident in its approximations of real human survey responses. We then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            test whether ChatGPT can recover marginal associations between covariates and find that regression
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            results estimated using human and synthetic samples often differ, sometimes substantially in systematic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ways. Finally, we document considerable sensitivity of synthetic responses to both the timing of when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a prompt was used to generate data, and also to the persona each prompt represents.17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We underscore that our empirical setting is a theoretically easy test for ChatGPT. Existing work has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            documented a western, especially American, bias in the LLM (Cao et al. 2023); we benchmark using
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            one of the most well-known American political opinion surveys; and we specify the precise year that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the human respondent participated in the survey, both of which are prior to the end of ChatGPT's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            training period. Even so, we test the sensitivity of our conclusions to other questions and datasets in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SI Section 12, finding significantly worse performance than we document in this paper, and supporting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            our intuition that what follows is a best-case scenario for synthetic data. Yet, even in this setting, the best
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            we can say is that the overall average synthetic responses are close to the population averages. For the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            kinds of associational questions that social scientists care about, synthetic survey data perform poorly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            even under the favorable conditions we examine.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.1. Accuracy of Average and Standard Deviations

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 1 plots the sample means and standard deviations for the various feeling thermometer scores
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            estimated using either the actual ANES respondents or the average of the synthetic respondents drawn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from ChatGPT.18 Because the synthetic data were collected to exactly match ANES respondents on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            selected covariates, the distributions ideally would be identical.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               While the average of ChatGPT responses does not exactly match the average survey response in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ANES, every synthetic mean falls within one standard deviation of the ANES average. In addition, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rank ordering of feeling thermometers is largely intact across both samples. That said, the distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of synthetic responses for some questions exhibits far less variation than human responses, especially
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            for questions asking about feelings toward racial and religious groups. The variation in the ChatGPT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            responses also reflects statistical uncertainty due to sampling from the underlying language model,19 so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            it is striking that these responses are still more tightly distributed than in the ANES data.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Even though the synthetic data broadly perform well in terms of summarizing overall human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            opinion, issues emerge when we look at subgroups. To demonstrate, we examine affective polarization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and partisan sectarianism, calculating how average opinions toward liberals, conservatives, and the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            major parties vary across groups of respondents defined by race and partisanship. Figure 2 presents the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            results, highlighting the relative extremity of ChatGPT responses, especially among Democrats, that is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            masked when averaging over partisanship in Figure 1. These differences are substantively meaningful,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            amounting to 0.5ｭ1 standard deviations of the ANES distribution of attitudes, and 10ｭ20 points on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the 100-point thermometer scale. In particular, these results suggest that Democrats like liberals more,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and conservatives less, than their human counterparts, exaggerating the out-group antipathy along
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ideological lines. Similar extremism is found among Republicans, especially among non-Hispanic Black
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Republicans. In general, the patterns reported in Figure 2 highlight that synthetic responses would
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            suggest that society is more politically hostile than it actually is.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 2 also reveals far smaller standard deviations in the synthetic estimates than found in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ANES. Beyond the substantive concerns with this overconfidence, the undersized variance of synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            responses poses serious inferential problems for attempts to use such data for pre-analysis study design

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               17In terms of the criteria proposed by Argyle et al. (2023), these three analyses correspond most closely evaluating the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            algorithmic fidelity in terms of the Social Science Turing Test, Pattern Correspondence, and Forward Continuity, respectively.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18Five of our 16 target groups were not asked in the ANES waves: Hispanic Americans, Democrats, Republicans, women,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and immigrants, although they were included in the alternative dataset that we examine in SI Section 6.2.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19We use a temperature parameter of 1 in our main analysis and demonstrate the strong positive association between this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hyperparameter and the empirical variance of the synthetic data in SI Section 2.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                Political Analysis 407

               Target Group                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LLM and ANES thermometer comparison

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jews
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              White Americans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Black Americans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Asian Americans

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Christians
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gays and Lesbians

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Muslims
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conservatives

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Liberals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Democratic Party
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Republican Party

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25        50                         75

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Feeling Thermometer Score

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Data  ANES ChatGPT 3.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 1. Average feeling thermometer results (x-axis) for different target groups (y-axis) by prompt type/timing (columns). Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANES estimates from the 2016 and 2020 waves indicated with red triangles and one standard deviation indicated with thick red bars.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LLM-derived averages indicated with black circles and thin black bars. Sample sizes for each groupwise comparison are identical.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          as some scholars have suggested (Argyle et al. 2023).20 Consider, for example, using synthetic opinions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from ChatGPT to conduct a power analysis for a human-respondent test of whether partisan affective
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          polarization has increased since 2012, when the average gap between in-party and out-party assessments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          among partisans in the ANES was 47.4. Table 1 reports the results. Using the estimates of the magnitude
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and variation in the ChatGPT-generated measures of affective polarization, we calculate the sample
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          size required to detect a difference from the 2012 level at various levels of power. As a baseline, we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          perform the same power calculation using the magnitude and variation in feeling thermometer scores
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          from our ANES comparison set. Even for 99% power, the ChatGPT estimates imply that just 33 partisan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          respondents would be necessary to detect a difference from affective polarization in 2012--almost an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          order of magnitude less than what we calculate from the ANES benchmark.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.2. Accuracy of Estimated Regression Coefficients

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Although synthetic data sometimes look reasonably accurate--albeit with too little variation--in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the aggregate, more concerning problems emerge when looking at conditional relationships. To test
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          whether the correlational structure of the synthetic data corresponds to the ANES benchmark, we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          examine differences in regression results obtained using true and synthetic feeling thermometers as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the dependent variable. This is a critical test for political science research in particular, where scholars
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are typically interested in the correlates of public opinion rather than in broad averages.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20These tighter standard deviations are not the product of calculating the average of 30 synthetic responses, as we calculate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          these based on a single synthetic measure per human respondent. We describe the posterior variation of the synthetic data in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          greater detail in SI Section 9.3.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5408 James Bisbee et al.

                   Target Group                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LLM and ANES thermometer comparison

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Democrat             Independent                        Republican

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Democratic Party

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Liberals                                                                                           Hispanic

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Conservatives

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Republican Party

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Democratic Party                                                                                   non-Hispanic black non-Hispanic white
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Liberals

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Conservatives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Republican Party

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Democratic Party               25 50 75 100 0 25 50 75 100 0                           25 50 75 100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Liberals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feeling Thermometer Score
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Conservatives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Republican Party

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Data       ANES         ChatGPT 3.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 2. Average feeling thermometer results (x-axis) for different target groups (y-axes) by party ID of respondent (columns). Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANES estimates from the 2016 and 2020 waves indicated with red triangles and one standard deviation indicated with thick red bars.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LLM-derived averages indicated by black circles and thin black bars. Sample sizes for each groupwise comparison are identical.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Table 1. Calculations of the sample size necessary for a specified power to reject the null
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            hypothesis of no difference in affective polarization among partisans from the average level in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the 2012 ANES, assuming a 95% significance level. The second column records the calculation if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            we assume an effect size and variance equal to the 2016ｭ2020 pooled ANES values (size 7.8, sd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            31.4); the third column is the same calculation with our ChatGPT estimates (size 12.5, sd 16.1).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Power                                    ANES est.  Sample size needed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ChatGPT est.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80%                                      129                                       16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            85%                                      147                                       18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            90%                                      172                                       21

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            95%                                      212                                       25

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            99%                                      299                                       35

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          We estimate linear regression models of the following form:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FTi,d =  + Id +  xi +  (Idxi) + i,d,                                  (1)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          where i indexes respondents, d indexes data source (ANES or ChatGPT), Id is an indicator for the data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          source being ChatGPT, and xi is a vector of the respondent characteristics used in our persona prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (age, gender, race, education, income, marital status, ideology, party ID, voter registration status, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          interest in news and politics). We are most interested in the vector of  coefficients measuring how the
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                                           Political Analysis 409

                Estimates from synthetic data                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Party ID                                    Ideology
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -25                                                  -20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -50  -25             0                   25      50         -20            0         20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Education                           Age                      Race                    Gender     Sig. Different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -10 0 10          8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6                       4                                                                                   pval > 0.05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3                       2                              10                     4                      pval < 0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0                       0                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -3                   -2                          4                         -4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -6                   -4                                                    -8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -8 -4 0 4 8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -6 -3 0 3 6           -4 -2 0 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Marital Status                      Income              Registration             News Interest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5 0 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10                      3                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5                       2                            5                        0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1                                                   -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0                       0                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -10 -5 0 5 10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -5                   -1                              -5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -10                  -2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -10 -5 0 5 10         -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Estimates from ANES data

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 3. Each point describes the coefficient estimate capturing the partial correlation between a covariate and a feeling thermometer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          score toward one of the target groups, estimated in either 2016 or 2020. The x-axis position is the coefficient estimated in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ANES data, and the y-axis position is the same coefficient estimated in the synthetic data. Solid points indicate coefficients who
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are significantly different when estimated in either the ANES or synthetic data, while hollow points are coefficients that are not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          significantly different. Points in the northeast and southwest quadrants generate the same substantive interpretations, while those
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in the northwest and southeast quadrants produce differing interpretations. A synthetic dataset that is able to perfectly recover
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          relationships estimated in the ANES data would have all points falling along the 45-degree line.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          partial correlation between each covariate in xi and the feeling thermometer score differs between the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          synthetic responses and the ANES benchmark.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             We run the specification in Equation (1) for each combination of feeling thermometer (the 11 target
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          groups in Figure 1) and survey year (2016 or 2020), for 22 total regressions. Figure 3 plots the resulting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          coefficient estimates estimated using the ANES (x-axis) versus the synthetic data (y-axis), broken out
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          by the predictor. Points are shaded based on whether the coefficients estimated on the synthetic data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          are significantly different from those estimated on the ANES (i.e., the p-value for the ^ estimate is less
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          than 0.05). Points closer to the 45-degree line indicate a better correspondence between the conclusions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          an applied researcher would draw using either human or synthetic datasets. Points in the off-diagonal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          quadrants (upper left and bottom right) are coefficients whose sign differs depending on which data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          source we employ, meaning that substantive conclusions drawn in the human sample would be reversed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in the synthetic sample.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The plot highlights the degree to which the synthetic data are influenced by political covariates.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          The ideology measure performs best, with points lying close to the 45-degree line, many of which do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          not differ significantly between the datasets. Partisanship also exhibits a strong positive association,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          although the apparent S-shape suggests that the associations between partisanship and the battery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of feeling thermometers are stronger in the synthetic data than in the human data. Conversely, we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          document far worse performance among other covariates, in several instances leading to substantively
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  410 James Bisbee et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            different conclusions--sometimes with opposite signs--than what we would learn from the actual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ANES.21

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3. Sensitivity of Synthetic Responses

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            In the course of our research establishing these problems, we uncovered additional concerns about the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reliability and replicability of synthetic sampling via ChatGPT. Specifically, we find that the distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of responses is highly sensitive to differences in the prompt used to generate data, which version of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ChatGPT is used, and even changes over time in the "same" model. Similar to the concerns about the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            effects of a "garden of forking paths" (Gelman and Loken 2014), the differences we find highlight the fact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that extracting responses from an LLM inevitably requires making data-dependent analytical decisions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that introduce stochastic error into the data generating process that cannot be sensibly calculated or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            corrected.22

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.1. Effect of Different Prompts

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            One unavoidable issue with using LLMs is that different prompts may affect the accuracy of responses.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            To investigate, we recollect the synthetic data with two modifications to the description of the persona.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The first prompt only describes the nonpolitical profile of the synthetic respondent, including their age,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            gender, race, marital status, education, and income. The second prompt only includes a description of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the synthetic respondent's political characteristics, including their ideology, partisanship, registration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            status, and interest in news and politics. By way of comparison, the full prompt used in earlier results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            includes all attributes in a single description. The raw code for these prompts is given below, where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the placeholder text is indicated with a capitalized characteristic in square brackets, which would be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            replaced with a description for the relevant ANES respondent as described above:23

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ Demographics only: "It is [YEAR]. You are a [AGE] year-old [MARST][RACETH][GENDER]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  with [EDUCATION] making [INCOME] per year, living in the United States."

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ Politics only: "It is [YEAR]. You are [IDEO], [REGIS][PID] who [INTEREST] pays
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  attention to what's going on in government and politics, living in the United States."

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ｷ Combined: "It is [YEAR]. You are a [AGE] year-old, [MARST], [RACETH][GENDER] with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [EDUCATION] making [INCOME] per year, living in the United States. You are [IDEO],
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [REGIS][PID] who [INTEREST] pays attention to what's going on in government and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  politics."

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We investigate the sensitivity by predicting the mean absolute error (the absolute difference between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the ANES feeling thermometer and the LLM's estimate; MAE) as a function of the prompt type
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            interacted with the target group and the party ID, controlling for all other covariates. As illustrated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in Figure 4, the mean absolute error is basically identical between the full prompt and politics-only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            prompt. However, failing to include information on the respondent's politics dramatically inflates the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            error for certain groups, notably those groups which are more politically salient (the parties, ideological
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            groups, gays and lesbians, and Muslims). Political descriptions do not dramatically change the LLM's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            errors when it comes to predicting the feeling thermometers toward racial or religious groups, except
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            for Muslims.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               21We provide additional analyses in our SI Section 10, positing that these issues are fundamentally reflections of the LLM's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            inability to encode the partial correlations that are of principal interest to scholars.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               22Although the process of determining the optimal prompt and accounting for the effects of pre-testing prompts is well
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            beyond the scope of this paper, important questions related to both arise.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               23The synthetic data used in our main analyses rely on a second-person prompt ("You are a . . ."). Levendusky and Malhotra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (2016) demonstrate that asking humans estimate others' attitudes produces exaggerated estimates of polarization. In SI Section
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3, we regather synthetic data using a first-person prompt ("I am a . . ."), finding less evidence of exaggerated polarization,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            although worse overall performance in terms of mean absolute error.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                             Political Analysis 411

               Group                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Prompt sensitivity

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mean Absolute Error (MAE) by prompt

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Democrat           Independent            Republican
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15 20 25 30 35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Republican Party                                   15 20 25 30 35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Liberals
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Predicted MAE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Democratic Party
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Conservatives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Muslims

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gays and Lesbians
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Christians
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jews

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Asian Americans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              White Americans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Black Americans

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 20 25 30 35

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Prompt  Demographics only                            Politics only         Combined

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 4. Mean absolute error (MAE; x-axes) associated with different target groups (y-axes) by partisanship (columns) for different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          prompts to generate the synthetic data. MAE is calculated as the absolute difference between the human respondent's feeling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          thermometer score for a given target group in the ANES data, relative to the average of 30 synthetic respondents drawn who match
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the human respondent in terms of their demographics only (light gray circles), political attributes only (dark gray triangles), or both
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          demographic and political attributes combined (black squares).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             On one hand, the differences we find are reassuring--the pattern of responses improves when we

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          include information on self-identified partisanship that we know is related to opinions. The fact that

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          accuracy improves when we include information that is known to be associated with public opinion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          suggests that the responses vary in broadly consistent ways.24 But even with the partisan prompts,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          considerable errors remain, and the variation in the changes we observe across various prompts

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          highlights the importance of the prompt being used and the unknown associations that the LLM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          leverages to generate those responses.25

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             These findings on prompt sensitivity raise important questions for interpreting and extrapolating

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          prompting practices. The variation in accuracy we find when applying similar prompts to different

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          questions and non-U.S. contexts in SI Section 13 reveals how the same prompt can yield different levels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          of accuracy in ways that raise questions about the ability to develop generalizable prompting practices.26

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.2. Effect of Changes in ChatGPT over Time

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A second issue is whether the same prompt produces similar responses over time. This is a key question
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          for the reproducibility of LLM-based research, as well as the reliability of conclusions based on synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          data. To explore the impact of changes over time, we ran a simpler version of our main prompt three
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          times: April 2023, June 2023, and July 2023.27 In the interim between our June and July runs, OpenAI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             24Arguably consistent with the Forward Continuity criteria of Argyle et al. (2023).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25We see more evidence for the sensitivity of synthetic data to the prompt being used when we compare responses from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          first- and second-person prompts containing the same level of description; see SI Section 3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             26The potential inability to do so also raises questions about how to document and account for these decisions when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          interpreting research findings.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             27This prompt did not include descriptions of the respondent's ideology, registration status, marital status, or interest in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          news and politics, and only specified that they were living in the United States in 2019. In addition, we only collected 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          synthetic respondents per persona, instead of 30 per individual human respondent, and we did not record explanations or the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          confidence in the output. Finally, our June 2023 run of the prompt faced a change in the formatting of the ChatGPT response
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5412 James Bisbee et al.                                                      July Data

                   Subsequent Data                                                                                                                                                                                                                Replication scatterplot                             y = 19 + 0.75 x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Difference between April and subsequent vintages
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               June Data

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100 y = 4.6 + 0.93 x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            75

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0       25  50  75  100 0                                 25               50         75  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                April Data

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        # samples 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5. Reproducibility of synthetic data over time. Both plots compare the synthetic dataset generated by a simple prompt gathered
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in April of 2023 to the identical prompt rerun in June (left facet) and July (right facet) of the same year. Each point indicates the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          number of observations associated with April versus later synthetic datasets, aggregating across respondents and target groups.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Linear regression equation indicated in the top left of both facets, revealing substantially attenuated differences between the April
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          and July runs of the same prompt.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          upgraded its default 3.5 Turbo version of ChatGPT on June 25, 2023, promising that the original would
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          be accessible until September 2023.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             These three snapshots of synthetic data produced from the same prompt allow us to characterize the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          degree to which such data are "reproducible" in two ways. First, are researchers able to exactly recover
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the same responses (dataset) using the same prompts over time? Second, even if the precise responses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          may vary, do patterns and correlations between the responses vary in ways that would change the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          characterization of relationships within the synthetic data? These questions speak to broader concerns
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          over how the LLM training and updating process affects replication.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 5 plots our April results (x-axes) against the June/July results (y-axes) using identical prompts.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Each point is the count of human-synthetic observations that share a given April-June/July coordinate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FT score, aggregating over all target groups. Perfect replication would produce a 45-degree line, which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          we indicate with a dashed red line.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Neither recollection of our data exactly reproduces our original synthetic data. The June sample
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          contains responses that are slightly less extreme than the original April data: the regression line is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          slightly "flatter" than the 45-degree line denoting equality (slope of 0.93), although it is not statistically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          distinguishable from a placebo test that randomly sampled the April data. In contrast, the July synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sample exhibits substantial mean reversion, with the coldest thermometer scores from prompt responses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in April increasing and the warmest scores declining to a lesser degree.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The patterns in Figure 5 reflect the effects of two sources of variation in synthetic data generated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          by closed-source LLMs. As the left panel reveals, exactly replicating synthetic data was impossible

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          which meant we did not record any data for one of the target groups. A detailed description of this prompt is included in SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Section 1.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                                                  Political Analysis 413

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            at the time we ran this initial analysis in the spring and summer of 2023.28 More concerning is the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pattern revealed in the right panel, which shows how the same prompts may produce different synthetic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            responses because of changes being made to the LLM that are beyond the control of the researcher.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Perhaps the flatter line indicates that tweaks based on reinforcement learning from human feedback
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            prevented the AI from expressing the coldest feelings toward any outgroup in our data. Or perhaps new
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            material was included in the LLM which changed the pattern of responses. Without knowing precisely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            what was done and how that affected the mapping from prompts to responses, it is impossible to know
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            precisely why the responses changed.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Open-source models, which we discuss further in SI Section 14, raise their own set of reproducibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            concerns. The most significant challenge is that researchers must either have institutional access to a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GPU cluster or rent time from a cloud service. These resources have become especially scarce--and thus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            expensive--with the explosion of interest in AI and the ongoing global chip shortage. Additionally, it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            takes more programming expertise to deploy an open-source LLM than to query a commercial API for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a closed model. Because both open-source and closed-source LLMs operate on a different computing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            paradigm than what political scientists are accustomed to, synthetic data pose new challenges for current
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            standards of reproducibility.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4. Discussion and Implications

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Human subjects are expensive and complicated. If scholars could replace them with LLM-based syn-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            thetic subjects, they could more easily collect information on public opinion, pretest survey questions,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            substitute the need to reach hard-to-reach populations, and so on. The allure of LLMs like ChatGPT is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the ability to quickly and cheaply obtain data without dealing with the many complications and ethical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            considerations that are associated with human subjects research. The fact that LLMs do a remarkably
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            good job at recovering average responses given by broad groups of respondents in the ANES makes their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            use tempting. However, our study reveals questions that warrant further investigation before relying on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            off-the-shelf LLMs as a substitute for characterizing public opinion (see, e.g., Aher, Arriaga, and Kalai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2023; Dillion et al. 2023; Horton 2023).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               First, our findings raise questions about the algorithmic fidelity of LLMs that are not specifically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            trained to capture the complex interdependencies present among human survey respondents. Second,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the precision of responses is excessively high, raising concerns about using synthetic responses for power
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            analyses and research design. In principle, these two issues could possibly be improved by specifically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            training an LLM using similar survey data, and important work has begun to better understand the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            potential uses of pre-trained LLMs.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               But even if prompt engineering and fine-tuning can produce synthetic samples that meaningfully
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            reflect a particular human opinion within a specific context, several important and difficult questions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            remain. First, how confident can we be that practices and procedures in any given context are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            generalizable? As our SI demonstrates, replicating our approach in other contexts reveals a performance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            that is frequently different from, and also worse than, the patterns we document in the main text. We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            observe this when examining the same questions from a national online survey, different questions in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            other surveys conducted in the United States, and different questions in surveys conducted in other
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            countries (see SI Sections 12 and 13). Second, comparison against a known ground truth is a useful
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            way to assess the algorithmic fidelity of synthetic sample, but what about when the ground truth is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            unknown?29 While neither is likely sufficient, other options include the proportion of null responses or

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               28In November 2023, OpenAI added the ability to set a seed which allows for more reliably con-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sistent synthetic responses, although as discussed on their blog, it is not 100% identical across draws
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (https://cookbook.openai.com/examples/reproducible_outputs_with_the_seed_parameter).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               29Even treating an existing survey as the ground truth when comparing results assumes that the survey accurately captures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the true relationship. Given concerns noted in the introduction, however, a growing crisis in public opinion polling raises
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            questions about whether this assumption is valid. While it is indeed theoretically possible that the synthetic data are closer to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the unknown population parameters of interest than survey data affected by non-ignorable nonresponse, short of designing
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  414 James Bisbee et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the proportion of responses passing a prespecified "nonsense" test. Third, because prompt engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            combined with tuning can induce the synthetic data to draw a wide variety of conclusions in ways that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            change over time, does this suggest the need for preregistering prompts and fine-tuning and archiving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            historical LLMs to facilitate transparency and replicability? How do we account for the effect of these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            uncertainties and changes on our estimates?30

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Beyond these technological and statistical issues, questions related to the ethics of replacing human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            opinion with synthetic opinion generated from unknown and unknowable methods are also relevant.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Relying on predictions generated by a model with unknown assumptions, trained on an unknown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            corpus, as a substitute for asking humans how they think and feel about the world is contrary to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the origins and importance of public opinion research. Because surveys are often intended to check
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            political power and track how opinions change over time and vary between groups, relying on available
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            preexisting content to generate/extrapolate synthetic opinions risks hard-wiring the past into the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            present. Finally, as social scientists, we should be cognizant of the difference between characterizing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the opinions and behavior of actual human beings--however imperfect and complicated those efforts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            may be--and studying outputs from an algorithm with unknown properties.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Acknowledgements. The authors are grateful to audiences at Vanderbilt University, Seoul National University, Korea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            University, Sungkyunkwan University, Yonsei University, KDI School of Public Policy and Management, and the 2024 annual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            conference of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Author Contributions. All authors contributed to the manuscript and revisions. J.B. led the empirical analyses of ChatGPT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B.K. led the empirical analyses of Falcon-40B-Instruct.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Funding Statement. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            profit sectors.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Competing Interests. The authors declare no competing interests.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Data Availability Statement. Replication code for this article is available in Bisbee et al. (2024) at https://doi.org/10.7910/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DVN/VPN481.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Supplementary Material. For supplementary material accompanying this paper, please visit https://doi.org/10.1017/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pan.2024.5.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            References

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Abdulhai, M., G. Serapio-Garcia, C. Crepy, D. Valter, J. Canny and N. Jaques. 2023. "Moral Foundations of Large Language
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Models". Preprint, arXiv:2310.15337

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aher, G. V., R. I. Arriaga and A. T. Kalai. 2023. "Using Large Language Models to Simulate Multiple Humans and Replicate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Human Subject Studies". In International Conference on Machine Learning 337ｭ371. PMLR.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Argyle, L. P., E. C. Busby, N. Fulda, J. R. Gubler, C. Rytting, and D. Wingate. 2023. "Out of One, Many: Using Language Models
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to Simulate Human Samples." Political Analysis: 1ｭ15. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2023.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bail, C. 2022. Breaking the Social Media Prism: How to Make Our Platforms Less Polarizing. Princeton: Princeton University
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Press.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Beauchamp, N. 2017. "Predicting and Interpolating State-Level Polling Using Twitter Textual Data." American Journal of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Political Science 61 (2): 490ｭ503.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bender, E. M., T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell. 2021. "On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Models Be Too Big?" In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 610ｭ623.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               New York: Association for Computing Machinery.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bisbee, J. 2019. "BARP: Improving Mister P Using Bayesian Additive Regression Trees." American Political Science Review 113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (4): 1060ｭ1065. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055419000480

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and fielding a survey of human respondents that overcomes the challenges that the $14 million ANES cannot, this argument
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            seems untestable and, if true, calls into question decades of public opinion research.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30Although on the surface, prompt engineering is analogous to survey wording effects, there are important differences. First,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            unlike question wording effects, the expected effects of prompting differences are harder to predict and understand. Second,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            the effects and importance of prompt engineering affect every LLM output, not just our study's human-inspired versions. For
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            example, White et al. (2023) demonstrate the effects of different prompts on the success of software development tasks.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5                                                                                                  Political Analysis 415

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bisbee, J., J. D. Clinton, C. Dorff, B. Kenkel, and J. M. Larson. 2024. "Replication Data for: Synthetic Replacements for Human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Survey Data? The Perils of Large Language Models." https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/VPN481

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cao, Y., L. Zhou, S. Lee, L. Cabello, M. Chen, and D. Hershcovich. 2023. "Assessing Cross-Cultural Alignment between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ChatGPT and Human Societies: An Empirical Study." In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Cross-Cultural Considerations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in NLP (C3NLP), 53ｭ67. Dubrovnik: Association for Computational Linguistics. https://aclanthology.org/2023.c3nlp-1.7.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Caughey, D., and C. Warshaw. 2015. "Dynamic Estimation of Latent Opinion Using a Hierarchical Group-Level IRT Model."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Political Analysis 23 (2): 197ｭ211. http://www.jstor.org/stable/24572968.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Clinton, J. D., J. S. Lapinski, and M. J. Trussler. 2022. "Reluctant Republicans, Eager Democrats?: Partisan Nonre-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               sponse and the Accuracy of 2020 Presidential Pre-Election Telephone Polls." Public Opinion Quarterly 86 (2): 247ｭ269.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfac011; https://academic.oup.com/poq/article-pdf/86/2/247/44009276/nfac011.pdf.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Clinton, J. D., et al. 2021a. "American Association of Public Opinion Research Task Force on Pre-Election Polling:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               An Evaluation of the 2020 General Election Polls." https://aapor.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Task-Force-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               on-2020-Pre-Election-Polling_Executive-Summary.pdf.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cowen, T. 2022. "ChatGPT AI Could Make Democracy Even More Messy." https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -12-06/chatgpt-ai-could-make-democracy-even-more-messy.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DeBell, M., and J. A. Krosnick. 2009. "Computing Weights for American National Election Study Survey Data." ANES Technical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Report Series, No. nes012427.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dillion, D., N. Tandon, Y. Gu, and K. Gray. 2023. "Can AI Language Models Replace Human Par-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ticipants?" Trends in Cognitive Sciences 27 (7): 597ｭ600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2023.04.008;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364661323000980.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Druckman, J. N., and M. S. Levendusky. 2019. "What Do We Measure When We Measure Affective Polarization?" Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Opinion Quarterly 83 (1): 114ｭ122.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gelman, A. 1997. "Poststratification into Many Categories Using Hierarchical Logistic Regression." Survey Methodology 23:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               127ｭ135.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gelman, A., and E. Loken. 2014. "The Statistical Crises in Science." American Scientist 102 (6): 460ｭ465.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ghitza, Y., and A. Gelman. 2013. "Deep Interactions with MRP: Election Turnout and Voting Patterns among Small Electoral

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Subgroups." American Journal of Political Science 57 (3): 762ｭ776.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gilardi, F., M. Alizadeh, and M. Kubli. 2023. "ChatGPT outperforms crowd workers for text-annotation tasks". In Proceedings

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(30), e2305016120.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Goplerud, M. 2024. " Re-Evaluating Machine Learning for MRP Given the Comparable Performance of (Deep) Hierarchical

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Models." American Political Science Review 118 (1): 529ｭ536.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Graham, D. A. 2023. "The Polling Crisis Is a Catastrophe for American Democracy--theatlantic.com."

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/11/polling-catastrophe/616986/.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Horton, J. J. 2023. "Large Language Models as Simulated Economic Agents: What Can We Learn from Homo Silicus?" (No.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               w31122). National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Iyengar, S., and S. J. Westwood. 2019. "The Origins and Consequences of Affective Polarization." Annual Review of Political

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science 22 (1): 129ｭ146.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Keeter, S., N. Hatley, C. Kennedy, and A. Lau. 2017. What Low Response Rates Mean for Telephone Surveys. Pew Research Center

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [in en-US]. https://www.pewresearch.org/methods/2017/05/15/what-low-response-rates-mean-for-telephone-surveys/.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kennedy, C., et al. 2018. "An Evaluation of the 2016 Election Polls in the United States." Public Opinion Quarterly 82 (1): 1ｭ33.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfx047; https://academic.oup.com/poq/article-pdf/82/1/1/24265180/nfx047.pdf.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lax, J. R., and J. H. Phillips. 2009. "How Should We Estimate Public Opinion in the States?" American Journal of Political

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Science 53 (1): 107ｭ121.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Levendusky, M. S., and N. Malhotra. 2016. "(Mis) Perceptions of Partisan Polarization in the American Public." Public Opinion

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Quarterly 80 (S1): 378ｭ391.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Motoki, F., V. Pinho Neto, and V. Rodrigues. 2023. "More Human than Human: Measuring ChatGPT Political Bias." Available

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               at SSRN 4372349.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OpenAI. 2021. "ChatGPT 3.5 Turbo." https://openai.com/blog/chat-gpt-3-5-turbo/.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rozado, D. 2023. "The Political Biases of ChatGPT." Social Sciences 12 (3): 148. https://doi.org/10.3390/socsci12030148;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://www.mdpi.com/2076-0760/12/3/148.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Santurkar, S., E. Durmus, F. Ladhak, C. Lee, P. Liang, and T. Hashimoto. 2023. "Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect?"

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               In International Conference on Machine Learning 29971ｭ30004. PMLR.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Shapiro, W. 2019. "The Polling Industry Is in Crisis." https://newrepublic.com/article/154124/polling-industry-crisis.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Spirling, A. 2023. "Why Open-Source Generative AI Models Are an Ethical Way Forward for Science." Nature 616: 413.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-01295-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tnberg, P. 2023. "ChatGPT-4 Outperforms Experts and Crowd Workers in Annotating Political Twitter Messages with Zero-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Shot Learning." Preprint, arXiv:2304.06588.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tucker, J. 2017. "Measuring Public Opinion with Social Media Data." In The Oxford Handbook of Polling and Polling Methods,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1ｭ22. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 210.157.193.185, on 26 Apr 2026 at 01:24:41, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5  416 James Bisbee et al.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Waldner, D., and E. Lust. 2018. "Unwelcome Change: Coming to Terms with Democratic Backsliding." Annual Review of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Political Science 21: 93ｭ113.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Washington Post. 2023. "AI Chatbots Are Learning to Hold More Natural Conversations." https://www.washingtonpost.com/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               technology/interactive/2023/ai-chatbot-learning/.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wei, J., Y. , Tay, R. Bommasani, C. Raffel, B. Zoph, S. Borgeaud, D. Yogatama, M. Bosma, D. Zhou, D. Metzler, and E.H. Chi.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2022. "Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models." Preprint, arXiv:2206.07682.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            White, J., Q. Fu, S. Hays, M. Sandborn, C. Olea, H. Gilbert, A. Elnashar, J. Spencer-Smith, and D.C. Schmidt. 2023. "A Prompt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pattern Catalog to Enhance Prompt Engineering with ChatGPT." Preprint, arXiv:2302.11382.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wu, P. Y., J. A. Tucker, J. Nagler, and S. Messing. 2023. "Large Language Models Can Be Used to Estimate the Ideologies of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Politicians in a Zero-Shot Learning Setting." Preprint, arXiv:2303.12057.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cite this article: Bisbee, J., Clinton, J. D., Dorff, C., Kenkel, B. and Larson, J. M., (2024). Synthetic Replacements for Human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Survey Data? The Perils of Large Language Models. Political Analysis, 401ｭ416. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2024.5
